I used to love the sound of the penny whistle. It's a well-nigh perfect instrument: portable, cheap, and low-tech, with no moving parts. It's easy to play yet capable of great subtlety; a skillful player can make notes bend and quiver and sigh. And it immediately invokes a long and precious tradition. The penny whistle and tin whistle, with or without a mouthpiece, provide one of the primal sounds of Celtic music, plaintive in slow airs and dizzyingly nimble in dance tunes. When a musician pulls a whistle out of a pocket and joins in a melody, it's a surviving link to centuries of homemade music. But now it is my regretful duty to propose a ban on penny whistle use anywhere outside a Guinness -pulling pub, effective immediately. A sweet sound is on the verge of curdling, and it is time to save it from overexposure. There won't be any immediate hardship. St. Patrick's Day is well behind us, and "My Heart Will Go On," the whistle-topped hit from the "Titanic" soundtrack, has been duly presented with its Oscar (and can look forward to a Grammy next year). The "Titanic" album is berthed at No. 1, with {{Celine Dion}} at No. 2. When I heard a tin whistle tootling through a blues, "Broken Hearted," on {{Eric Clapton}} new album, "Pilgrim," it suddenly became clear: the whistle is becoming the trendy sonic accessory of the late 1990s. This happens to instruments, and it's not a pretty process. It happened to the sitar (and then the electric sitar), to the Cajun accordion and to panpipes. They are all now tainted by their abuse at the hands of everyone from hippie bands to horror movie auteurs. Rousted from their ethnic enclaves, the instruments' masters revel in their new-found prominence. Then, too late, they realize that they're only the flavor of the moment, and the moment never lasts. At first the new sound is a novelty, an ear-catching break from the usual guitars and keyboards; it leaps out of a radio speaker. Then, in a matter of years or months, it's everywhere: first the imitative bands, then the soundtracks and commercials, in a process that keeps speeding up. As soon as they can retool, keyboard manufacturers begin to include a pre-set simulation of the sound, so that the local Top 40 band can start inserting it into songs. By then, the sound is forever associated with its pop moment, the way reverbed guitar spells early- 1960s surf music or staccato synthesizers hark back to new-wave rock, circa 1979. For years, the whistle hovered under the pop radar. When {{Van Morrison}} sang with the whistle-toting Chieftains in 1988, {{Van Morrison}} was simply claiming {{Van Morrison}} Irish heritage. When {{Paul Simon}} put a whistle solo in the middle of "You Can Call Me Al" on "Graceland" in 1986, {{Paul Simon}} was paying direct homage to South African kwela music, another penny whistle stronghold. But there was no rush to latch on to the sound. For nearly a decade, the whistle tootled on in easy obscurity. Then along came the corporate Celtic blockbusters of the late 1990s, "Riverdance" and "Lord of the Dance," with a whistle skirling while ranks of vigorous step-dancers clattered away in formation, something like an Irish "Triumph of the Will." Simultaneously, in quieter realms, New Age music latched on to Celtic music for its soothing, timeless drones and the gentle but piquant tones of the traditional instruments. As ethnicity was being rediscovered worldwide, the Celts were well prepared. {{James Horner}} uses elements of both "Riverdance" muscle and New Age sweetness to lend a Celtic veneer to its sweeping Romantic crescendos. (Perhaps the Celtic connection is that the Titanic was built in Belfast.) And as the movie and {{James Horner}} became omnipresent, the innocent whistle turned into something else. It has moved from the unassuming context of a ceilidh, an Irish jam session, to sail above an orchestra and to parley with {{Celine Dion}} ; it has become an implement of coercive tear-jerking. No doubt other arrangers, even now, are planning to use it the same way. TOO GOOD A SOUND TO LOSE, ULTIMATELY Banned or not, the whistle will have its time, then recede. That {{Eric Clapton}} song, five years hence, will immediately signal "1998" the way an electric sitar moans "late 1960s." Of course, the whistle won't disappear from traditional Irish groups, and the thriving subgenre of Celtic New Age music isn't likely to rule it out either. It's too good a sound to lose. In the broader pop arena, meanwhile, the whistle will fade out of earshot, probably soon after it turns up in a commercial for some deeply inappropriate product. Producers will move on to the next instrument: the elemental honk of the didgeridoo, perhaps, or the mellow peal of the Indonesian trompong, a set of tuned gongs. And then, in 15 to 20 years, some sample-happy producer will get the bright idea of placing the clear, airy tone of the whistle into a mix. Someone else will notice it and add it to another track, and it will spread the way 1970s wah-wah blaxploitation guitars are showing up all over the place. Some people will remember the "Titanic" boom as simple nostalgia or forgiven kitsch. Certain children will note their parents growing all misty-eyed and laugh or join them with a tinge of self-consciousness. Hearing the sound of breath through tin, they will imagine not the green fields of Ireland, but the whistle's days in the big time, amplified and ubiquitous, when a humble instrument was touched by destiny.