Radar estimates of rainfall over eastern Nebraska and southern Iowa exceeded 5 inches on Tuesday as an intense low-pressure system stalled over the middle Mississippi Valley. This disturbance will slowly move east Wednesday as a new center of low pressure forms farther to the south in western Tennessee. Rain will taper off across the Middle West, but drizzle and low clouds will persist in the central and northern Plains. A wedge of cool air will occupy the Northeast as clouds and light showers move into southern New England ahead of a warm front. Developing onshore winds will keep the North Atlantic Coast cooler than seasonal levels. Some sunshine along with breezes from the southwest will bring very mild air to the Middle Atlantic region. Thunderstorms will form into a cluster over the interior Southeast as a jet stream disturbance interacts with very humid air moving inland from the Gulf of Mexico. Hail and damaging straight-line winds are possible with a few of the storms. A cold front pushing eastward across the lower Mississippi Valley will be followed by sunny and pleasantly warm weather in the southern Plains. Cool, moist air will cover most of the Rockies and Pacific States as jet stream disturbances move steadily east from the North Pacific. Snow levels will decrease a few hundred feet in the Cascades. Patches of rain will dampen northern California and western Oregon as low pressure moves slowly inland. The Southwest will be sunny and a bit warmer, but clouds will arrive later in the day. Focus: Capital Snow A tenth of an inch of snow fell at Ronald Reagan Washington International Airport on Dec. 9, 1997, the first and last time it snowed in our nation's capital this season. The modicum of snow matched the mark set in the 1972 - 1973, which had held the exclusive title as the least snowiest winter of record. Curiously, there were 16 days with a trace of snow this season, compared to 12 days with a trace of snow in 1972 - 73. The chances of a late spring snow in Washington are slim. After April 15, there has been only one occurrence of measurable snow since weather records began in 1887.