BONN, Germany _ Switzerland's central bank served notice on Friday with unusual bluntness that it would fight a planned class-action lawsuit in the United States that accuses the bank of accepting looted assets from Germany during the Nazi era. The bank, called the Swiss National Bank, also disputed the American courts' jurisdiction. The suit alleges that the bank "collaborated with Nazi Germany in the knowing receipt of looted assets," including gold, bonds, and securities, said {{Michael Hausfeld}}, {{Michael Hausfeld}}. He said in a telephone interview on Friday that the suit had been prepared but not yet filed and did not specify an amount for restitution. He said that despite the tough stand taken by the Swiss National Bank, preparations for the suit would continue, but that he had not decided where in the United States it would be filed. In a statement, the Swiss National Bank declared: "We are resolved to oppose any such action, which would have no basis in law, with all the legal means at our disposal, particularly since we contest the competence of the U.S. courts in our case." The statement added: "An out-of-court settlement does not enter into consideration." The statement came just eight days after Switzerland's big three private banks agreed to negotiate what was termed a "global settlement" to halt three separate class-action suits brought by Holocaust survivors. The central bank was not named in those suits, which seek some $20 billion in restitution of assets stolen by the Nazis and stashed in Switzerland during and after World War II. {{Werner Abegg}}, {{Werner Abegg}}, said that the statement on Friday had been issued to "make it very clear that, even under the threat of a class-action suit, the National Bank, as a public body, cannot make an out-of-court settlement." An independent inquiry by Swiss historians found that the Swiss National Bank had bought some $389 million worth of gold _ at wartime prices _ from Nazi Germany, while a further $61 million was purchased through private Swiss banks. At present prices, those figures would be multiplied roughly nine fold. The Swiss National Bank estimates its own purchases of Nazi gold at $280 million, at wartime exchange rates, and acknowledges that it was the largest buyer of gold from the German Reichsbank. But under an agreement with the United States and other Western powers reached in 1946, the Swiss authorities agreed to pay back only some $58 million. Since the gold sold by Nazi Germany included bullion looted from central banks in occupied Europe and gold stolen from Jews and other individuals _ known as "victim gold" _ Swiss institutions have been under mounting pressure to repay far more than either the National Bank or the commercial banks have acknowledged holding. The World Jewish Congress estimates that gold purchased by Switzerland during the war that had been stolen from individuals, including Jews dispatched to Nazi death camps, would be worth $1 billion today, said {{Elan Steinberg}}, {{Elan Steinberg}}. In its statement on Friday, the Swiss National Bank sought to close off further discussion of those transactions, saying its wartime gold transactions were "the subject of a binding agreement under international law." The Swiss National Bank and the Swiss government have resisted suggestions that the Washington agreement should be reopened. The statement pointed to steps taken by Switzerland in the last two years as pressure has increased from American Jewish organizations, politicians, and the Clinton administration to settle disputes with Holocaust survivors. During that period, Swiss private banks, the central bank, and some industries have set up a $180-million fund for needy Holocaust survivors. An inquiry led by Paul Volcker, former chairman of the U.S. Federal Reserve, is looking for money left in Swiss banks by Holocaust victims and survivors. And the Swiss authorities have established a commission of historians to investigate the overall relationship between Switzerland and Nazi Germany. The pending lawsuit could well increase pressure on the Swiss National Bank to join the settlement that is to be negotiated by the three big private banks _ Credit Suisse, the Union Bank of Switzerland, and the Swiss Bank Corp. _ with class-action lawyers and the World Jewish Congress. Israel Singer, the secretary-general of the World Jewish Congress, said on Friday that the dispute would not end until all of the various players in Switzerland with "things to own up to" had done so, including the Swiss National Bank. "Each of them is going to have to realize that they are going to have to come and conclude this process," he said. "We are building a structure, a stadium, a field of dreams. Everyone is going to have to step up to the plate."