DETROIT _ Auto sales fell 1.7 percent last month, although strong results from a rebate-fueled sales drive by General Motors Corp. helped offset weak sales at many other auto makers. GM said Friday that its sales rose 3.7 percent in March, compared with the 1997 period, helping pull up the results for the industry as a whole. Ford Motor Co. said Friday that its sales fell 2.6 percent. GM's top sales and marketing executive also signaled a change in management's view on offering the rebates and other incentives that customers love but investors dread. The company, which had watched its market share dwindle as it tried to avoid offering costly discounts, acknowledged a need to stabilize its share of the car and truck market. "There is no one in General Motors who doesn't understand and believe that market share is important, and that's the way we're going to manage the business going forward," said {{Ronald L. Zarrella}}, {{Ronald L. Zarrella}}. "In the absence of a fairly crippling strike or labor action, it would be unlikely that our share would be under 30 percent for any period of time." {{Ronald L. Zarrella}} insisted GM would pay for the expensive rebates and other incentives by cutting costs elsewhere, rather than by turning in lower-than-expected profits. "We are going to be competitive going forward, and we think we can cut costs enough to make our profitability objectives and to make our market share objectives," {{Ronald L. Zarrella}} said. Wall Street was untroubled by the reversal. "It is a shift," Wendy Beale Needham, an auto analyst at Donaldson, Lufkin &AMP; Jenrette, said. "It is only acknowledging the realities of the marketplace _ that if everyone else is using incentives, you can't sell without incentives." However, she said GM should be able to offer more discounts without unduly crimping profits because it could cut costs faster than it would need to increase incentives. The company's strategy change came after a dismal showing in February, when sales were so weak that GM's market share skidded to 28.7 percent, well below the 30 percent level considered an important psychological barrier. Last month, GM fought back with an onslaught of rebates and discounts on loans and leases, and by stepping up its television advertising. It worked. March sales rose 3.7 percent over all, compared with the period a year earlier, with car sales falling 1.9 percent and sales of sport utility vehicles, minivans and pickup trucks rising 11.0 percent. The company's market share jumped to 33 percent _ well above the 31.3 percent share for all of last year, and far better than February's dismal showing. For the auto industry as a whole, the seasonally adjusted annual rate of sales reached a healthy 15.1 million in March, below the robust 15.5 million annual rate during the period a year earlier but slightly better than the 15 million annual rate in February. For Wall Street, the March results were reassuring despite the 1.7 percent sales drop industrywide. "The decline is only because the year -ago number was so high," {{David Bradley}}, {{David Bradley}}, said. "We've fallen down to normal selling rates, but still robust and healthy rates." Ford said its 2.6 percent sales decline was a result of forgone sales from five cars and trucks the company discontinued because they were unprofitable. Ford's car sales fell 5.9 percent while the company's sales of sport utility vehicles, minivans and pickup trucks edged down one-tenth of 1 percent. Ford also announced Friday that it would extend existing incentives on 1998 models through July 2 and on leftover 1997 models through June 2. Ford executives were optimistic about the industry's outlook. "The U.S. industry is on pace to record its fifth consecutive year of sales in the 15 to 15.5 million range," {{Robert L. Rewey}}, {{Robert L. Rewey}}, said. Ford's Jaguar unit said that its sales rose 19.9 percent. Many auto makers that reported monthly results Thursday showed sales gains. Daimler-Benz AG's Mercedes sales jumped 69.1 percent, helped by strong sales of a new sport utility vehicle. Volkswagen AG's sales jumped 43.7 percent in March as the New Beetle reached showrooms. The Suzuki Motor Corp. sales rose 72.6 percent. Volvo sales rose 28.6 percent. Volkswagen's Audi AG's sales rose 17.1 percent. BMW sales rose 5.7 percent. Others fared worse. Porsche AG sales dropped 6 percent and Isuzu Motors Ltd. sales fell 1.5 percent. The Chrysler Corp. said Wednesday that its sales fell 1.8 percent.