TOKYO _ Borrowers in Japan, including even the healthiest corporations, faced a new challenge on Friday as Moody's Investors Service provided a pessimistic outlook on the nation's pristine credit rating. The exchange rate of Japan's currency, the yen, tumbled to a six-and-a-half-year low, and the stock and bond markets fell on the decision by the American-based ratings agency to change its view on Japan _ whose government debt has been rated triple-A _ from "stable" to "negative." Moody's did not change any existing bond ratings, but the negative outlook may lead to a formal review in 18 months to two years. A lowered rating could raise borrowing costs for all Japanese, from consumers to large corporations, even those with impeccable credit. And such a move could further weaken Japanese banks, which already pay more to borrow because they hold in excess of $600 billion in bad loans. The step by Moody's was a surprise because even with Japan's economic problems, it is still the world's largest creditor nation and there is little doubt about its ability to repay debts. But the announcement showed that Moody's _ one of the world's big credit raters, along with Standard &AMP; Poor's and Duff &AMP; Phelps _ was beginning to rethink Japan's long-term prospects. In trading here Friday the dollar surged to 135.42 yen, the highest since September 1991, before recovering a little. The benchmark Nikkei index of 225 stocks fell for the third consecutive day _ to a four-month low of 15,517.78. Bond prices also declined, pushing the yield on the key 10-year Japanese government bond to 1.685 percent, a six-week high. Bond prices and yields move in opposite directions "The world doesn't trust Japan anymore, even though Japan has lots of money," commented Xinyi Lu of Paribas Capital Markets Ltd. Moody's lowered its rating of the government's yen-denominated debt, typically the least risky securities. Moreover, it darkened its outlook on Japan's sovereign ceiling, which is effectively the government's ability to repay foreign-currency obligations. No Japanese borrower can have a higher rating than the government, so if the sovereign ceiling's rating is in time actually lowered, that would hurt triple-A rated companies like Toyota or the Tokyo Electric Power Company. Moody's said the change reflected "uncertainty about the ability of the authorities to achieve a policy consensus" to help the economy. It added that persistent weakness in the financial industry had made Japan more vulnerable, and it questioned whether official efforts to stimulate the economy would work. {{Kanezo Muraoka}}, {{Kanezo Muraoka}}, reacted to the Moody's news by saying, "the government understands Japan has strong fundamentals in many respects." The Moody's announcement was the finale in a weak of particularly bad economic news in Japan. A government attempt to buoy the stock market by purchasing shares had only fleeting effects. A central bank quarterly survey of business sentiment, the Tankan, showed some of the worst pessimism in 20 years. And {{Norio Ohga}}, {{Norio Ohga}}, said the economy was verging on collapse. On Friday, the Economic Planning Agency said the economy had stagnated for the last two months.