BEIJING (AP) _ A small and secretive Chinese opposition party has ambitious goals: bringing free elections, political democracy and greater civil liberties than currently allowed by the ruling Communist Party, a Beijing -based member of the underground group says. The 29-year -old member of the China Democratic Justice Party stopped short of saying that they want to see the communists overthrown. Instead, he said they wanted to be able to compete on an equal footing with them in elections and "let the people decide who rules." "When we unite, we won't just be a few hundred or a few thousand people. We'll be able to grow into several million people, several tens of million," he said in an interview, the first by a China -based member of the group. "We'll be like the Polish Solidarity union movement, a nationwide civil power." The organization announced its formation last month in faxes to foreign reporters in Beijing. It said it was headquartered with exiled Chinese dissidents in the United States and had members in China. Until now, however, there had been no way of confirming the group's existence with members inside China. The group is the first known opposition party organized by dissidents in China and overseas. But, forced to operate secretly in small cells, it does not for the moment appear to present any obvious threat to the communists ' nearly 50-year rule. China's constitution allows for freedom of association and other liberties. But working to change the communist -run system is illegal, and the party relentlessly punishes dissent. Thus, party members in China work in small cells that operate independently of each other to avoid detection, the party member said. He identified himself as Chen Jin, a pseudonym he said he has used when signing petitions to the government calling for democratic change. He was generally circumspect about his own history. He said he grew up in northeast China, studied in Beijing, where he works as a business manager, and took part in democracy protests in 1989 that started on Beijing's Tiananmen Square and spread to other cities. He said there were 17 members in his party cell, one of three in Beijing. The other members range in age and include university students, government bureaucrats, professors, two laborers and a lawyer, he said. He estimated the two other cells in Beijing have a similar number of members. Another cell operates in Changchun and another is planned in Harbin, he said. Both cities are in China's northeast, where dissatisfaction over layoffs at run-down state firms is mounting. According to New York -based dissident Fu Shenqi, a spokesman for the group, the party has at least 100 members in five to 10 branches in provinces and cities across China. The party's demands include freedom of speech, freedom of assembly, freedom to protest, freedom of the press, and freedom to set up opposition parties, the Beijing -based member said. "We all have a common conviction _ bringing political diversification and political democracy to China," he said. Asked how the party would recruit members, he described a somewhat vague process whereby party members would start by chatting to ordinary Chinese _ he mentioned taxi drivers, factory workers, entrepreneurs and soldiers _ about issues of public concern. These could include official corruption within the party and government, layoffs, or other sources of dissatisfaction that have arisen in China's two-decade shift from a planned to a market economy. Through such contacts they would look for suitable people to join the party, he said. "If after one meeting, two meetings, many meetings, we discover that they think like us and are willing to operate in an organization, then they will become a target for us," he said. "When we are strong, the Communist Party will have lost its ruling base, the army won't carry out its orders," he added. "At that time, we'll use negotiations to resolve the problems in society."