VATICAN CITY (AP) _ More than 10 years after it was promised in a meeting with Jewish leaders, a major Vatican document on the Holocaust is ready. The Vatican said Saturday the document would be made public on Monday. Jewish groups have been keenly awaiting the document to see if it will continue to heal Jewish-Catholic relations. The last Vatican document of landmark proportions on Jewish relations was a 1965 statement that came out of the Second Vatican Council under Paul VI. "Nostra Aetate" (In Our Times) condemned anti-Semitism and said the Jews cannot be collectively blamed for the crucifixion of Jesus. Pope John Paul II has dedicated much of his nearly 20-year -old papacy to improving relations of the church with Jews, whom he refers to as "older brothers," after centuries of animosity. Word of the latest document first came on Sept. 1, 1987, during a meeting between the pope and Jewish leaders in Castel Gandolfo, the pontiff's summer residence in the hills southeast of Rome. The unprecedented meeting was hurriedly called as anxiety built in the Vatican that Jews might boycott a ceremony during the then soon-approaching papal visit to the United States. Jews were angered by the pope's audience earlier that year with then Austrian President Kurt Waldheim, who was been accused of helping deport Jews to Nazi concentration camps, allegations he denied. The Castel Gandolfo meeting was the first time Jewish representatives had sat down for informal discussions with a pope. Representatives at the 1987 meeting said the Vatican planned to publish a major document dealing with anti-Semitism and the genocide of European Jews by the Nazis in World War II. Since that meeting, John Paul has presided over several milestones that improved relations with Jews, including the establishment of diplomatic relations with Israel in 1995. Another ground-breaking step was the pope's visit to Rome's main synagogue in 1986. Last fall, the pope told a Vatican seminar on anti-Jewish currents in Christian theology that centuries of anti-Jewish prejudice had figured in "deadening" Christian resistance toe the Nazi persecution of Jews. But, to the disappointment of some Jewish groups, the pope steered clear of blaming the church itself. (fd)