COPYRIGHT 1998 BY WORLDSOURCES, INC., A JOINT VENTURE OF FDCH, INC. AND WORLD TIMES, INC. NO PORTION OF THE MATERIALS CONTAINED HEREIN MAY BE USED IN ANY MEDIA WITHOUT ATTRIBUTION TO WORLDSOURCES, INC. PEOPLE from across the world travel to Cherating on the east coast of Peninsular Malaysia mainly because Club Med has made it famous. However, Cherating, as many a visitor knows, is more than just Club Med. Within a short radius of Pahang's top beach spot, you can find many lovely things to do or see. My second visit to Cherating recently unveiled more places that I hadn't been to before. It was a weekend well spent; delighting in the greenery, soaking up the sun and enjoying the leisurely life by the seaside. My two friends from Singapore and I stayed at The Legend Resort, Cherating, 47km north of Kuantan or 45 minutes from Kuantan airport. If you prefer to drive, it's about five hours from Kuala Lumpur. At Cherating, there is a wide range of accommodation to choose from. Depending on your budget, there are top-notch resorts like The Legend, Impiana, Residence Inn, Holiday Villa Cherating and the new Swiss Garden, or the affordable chalets rented out by village folks. Foreigners can also arrange for homestay with locals, for a fee, of course. One of the first places we visited was a fishing village in Kuala Kemaman, on the Terengganu side of the border. Our plan to buy fresh fish did not materialise as Friday was a day of rest for the fishermen. Undeterred, we drove around Cukai, a tiny town in Terengganu that's bursting with banks (our guide Santhi Jayadhan counted at least a dozen) that service the oil and gas industries. Santhi, The Legend's senior sales manager, has been living in the area for several years and knows the place like the back of her hand. Next, we arranged to have a tour of the famous Club Med and noted with delight that there is a soon-to-be-opened turtle sanctuary and information centre beside the resort. This means city folks like me don't have to travel to Rantau Abang to see how turtles are hatched. The following day, we spent an enjoyable morning on a small, uninhabited island and the afternoon at Cherating village, arranged by the hotel. However, our guide Wan Yeh Mahmood (who is the resort's duty manager) seemed so enthusiastic that we couldn't possibly chicken out. As it turned out, the sea was calm and beautiful, and Pulau Ular (there are no snakes there) was great as a picnic spot. With only a stamp-sized patch of beach, the rocky Pulau Ular is better suited for fishing and snorkelling. The water was so clear that tiny fish could be seen swimming near some of the rocks. While we frolicked in the water, Wan and the boatman took the sampan out for a spot of fishing. We were pleased when Wan gave us his catch of a few medium- and small-sized fish. He later arranged for one of the resort's chefs to cook the fish in three styles: steamed, deep-fried, and prepared with delicious ayam percik sauce. According to The Legend's general manager, Kevin Loh, the resort's chefs are always willing to help guests, particularly long-staying ones, to cook their catch after a fishing trip or after a visit to the fishing village. A trip to the older part of Cherating village - with its kampung-style chalets, pubs, restaurants and handicraft workshops and where you can see Mak De's chalet-cum-restaurant - is not to be missed. "Mak Long De," said Santhi, "is an enterprising housewife who set up the first chalet for rent to tourists in the early '60s, about 20 years before Club Med came into the scene." We didn't get to see Mak Long De but we chatted with her relative, Pak De, a sprightly septuagenarian who has trained his monkey called "Salleh" to pluck coconuts to amuse tourists and for sale. The three-year -old berok can pick over 200 coconuts in a day. Pak De said it takes him between one and two months to train a monkey. He charges RM10 for the monkey to "perform" and RM1 for a coconut. To get a feel of how some locals earn a living, you can also watch village folks make gula melaka or brown sugar, and visit the Cherating Handicraft Centre where women gather to weave mengkuang (pandunus) leaves before fashioning them into pretty and functional items like mats, visors, bags, slippers, letter-holders, baskets, coasters and hand-held fans. One of the latest tourist attractions in the area is the Cherating Cultural Complex, a one-stop cultural centre where you can watch craftsmen and women painting batik, weaving mengkuang and tenun, or see a demonstration of traditional games like top-spinning, kite-flying, congkak and sepak raga. Or dine at the restaurant in the complex while enjoying a wayang kulit play or a traditional dance. Run by the Kuantan Municipal Council, the RM1 million complex is spread over 1.6ha near the Cherating River. It had its soft opening last June and is still being expanded. Our three-day getaway in Cherating finished off with a morning cruise on the Cherating River. I've never ceased to be amazed at the diversity and richness of Malaysia's flora and fauna. We saw within just a 30-minute ride up and down a portion of Cherating River a few kingfishers, an iguana, pheasants, monkeys, an eagle and spiders, and enjoyed the natural music created by cicadas and many birds. Thank goodness we don't have to travel half -way across the world to savour these simple pleasures of life.