ROME (AP) _ Twenty years after terrorists kidnapped former Premier Aldo Moro and left his bullet-riddled body in the back of a parked car, one question still haunts Italy : Could he have been saved? The anniversary of the kidnapping is being marked by television programs, new books, a play and published interviews with convicted members of the Red Brigades who took part in the crime. But the ex-terrorists have only added fuel to the debate about the assassination, which became the defining moment in Italy's reign of terrorism in the 1970s and early 80s. Moro was abducted in Rome on March 16, 1978, in an ambush that killed five of his bodyguards. His body turned up 55 days later in a car parked around the corner from the headquarters of both the Christian Democrat and Communist parties. Moro had just negotiated an agreement for the Communists and Christian Democrats, the leading political forces in Italy at that time, to collaborate. It was a historic agreement, a break with the long-standing policy backed by the United States to keep Western Europe's largest communist party away from power. Those political parties no longer exist, done in by scandals and an end to the Cold War that also took the bite out of the ideological divisions that so marked Italian society during the years of bullets and bombs. The kidnapping and slaying stiffened Italy's resolve to fight domestic terrorism, marking the beginning of the end to urban guerrilla gangs in the country. Then-premier Giulio Andreotti, like Moro a Christian Democrat and now on trial on charges of favoring the mafia, insisted earlier this month that the government did everything it could. "To free Moro, we activated everybody, including the armed forces," Andreotti said in a roundtable organized by the Corriere della Sera newspaper. The government stuck to hard-line policy, refusing any compromise, such as freeing terrorist prisoners despite Moro's increasingly desperate pleas. Mario Moretti, convicted as the triggerman, was quoted as saying that "just a signal, the recognition of the existence of political prisoners" would have been enough. "Instead, no one knew the right thing to do and we made a mistake. We all made a mistake," he was quoted as saying by the weekly Vita. But Anna Braghetti, another former Red Brigade member, gave a different version, saying the decision to kill Moro came after a poll among 200 members of the gang. The group could not justify sparing Moro's life, given that the government was not compromising and so many of his bodyguards were killed in an attempt to kidnap him, Braghetti was quoted as saying by Corriere della Sera. Attempts to close the dark chapter of the "years of lead" _ as the terrorist period is called _ by an amnesty for those convicted of terrorist crimes have been stalled in parliament. Opposition is strong to clemency for "blood crimes" like the Moro killing.