NAIROBI, Kenya (AP) _ After 10 days of seemingly endless negotiations, fears and dashed hopes, the leader of hostages released in Somalia Friday said he burst into tears when gunmen set him and his nine colleagues free. "We've gone through ups and downs," Swiss Thomas Gurtner said. "We are a group of 10 people, different nationalities, different cultural backgrounds, but we stuck it out together in a quite amazing way. We had some difficult moments, but in the end we survived it." Relieved relatives cheered and hugged Gurtner and nine others when they stepped off the Red Cross aircraft from Mogadishu. Other captives included Norwegian Ola Skuterud ; naturalized American Somali Ibrahim Ahmad ; Belgian Toon Vandenhove ; German Christoph Langenkamp ; Swiss Patrick Berner and Markus Fasel ; and French nurse Nadine Piantowsky. Two pilots, South African Robi Byrd and Kenyan Steve Riungu also were released. The 10 were kidnapped along with a Somali aid worker by renegade gunmen on April 15 as soon as their plane touched down in north Mogadishu. From then on, Somali elders and leaders, apparently embarrassed by the abductions and worried about their impact on the fragile peace process, were in daily contact with the captors. At one point, the kidnappers demanded up to one million dollars. At the end, no ransom was paid and the hostages were set free unconditionally, according to the Red Cross and Somali leader Ali Mahdi Mohamed. Bill Grant, a Somali advisor and a former U.S. congressman from Florida, said three families from the Abgal subclan staged the kidnapping because they felt they were excluded from the distribution of international aid. Aid workers and foreigners have been kidnapped in Somalia by militiamen eager to make easy money since the country disintegrated into a fiefdom of clans following the ouster of late dictator Mohamed Siad Barre in 1991. In the past, aid agencies have refused to pay ransoms, for fear of causing more Inside a walled north Mogadishu compound, the hostages were unaware of the course negotiations were taking, but kept their faith throughout, Gurtner said. "Hope was always there," he said. "We were treated as hostages. We were confined to a single room, 20 square meters (200 square feet) for 10 of us. But we always had access to water, food and sanitary facilities. Apart from a very few tense moments, generally speaking, we've been treated with respect." He blamed an international TV crew, which he did not name, for creating unnecessary tensions. "They forced their entrance into the compound and actually used some of the militiamen, almost inciting them to create the most dramatic affect," he said. "There, I thought I was not going to survive. The press has very seriously affected the dignity of all us." The news of the release came after a night of anxiety and last-minute bickering among the captors, he said. "The moment we came out of the room, when we saw colleagues from the Somali Red Crescent who came to pick us up, and once I was in the car and the car started moving, I burst out crying," Gurtner said. "It was a total moment of relief." The freed hostages appeared in good shape and there were no indications that they had been physically harmed. In Mogadishu, all three Somali faction leaders as well as clan elders came to congratulate the group on the release. Ali Mahdi Mohamed, a Somali leader from north Mogadishu, apologized for their ordeal on behalf of Somalis. (pvs/hh-kjd)