MOSCOW (AP) _ Russia and Switzerland signed an agreement Friday pledging to combine efforts to prevent Russian organized crime from laundering profits in Swiss banks. The memorandum, signed in Moscow by Swiss Federal Prosecutor Carla del Ponte and Russian Prosecutor General Yuri Skuratov, calls for sharing information about organized crime suspects and about banks involved in laundering or accepting deposits of illegal profits. There have been frequent reports that Russian organized crime uses Swiss banks to launder criminal profits running to hundreds of millions of dollars. The activity apparently thrives in the Lake Geneva area, where the Russians buy up property and run prostitution rackets. Last year, del Ponte and Skuratov agreed to step up efforts in fighting organized crime, but the memorandum signed Friday was the first official agreement between the two nations' law-enforcement agencies, Skuratov said. "I believe that we have made a very important step toward raising a solid barrier against organized crime," Skuratov told reporters after the signing. Nobody knows exactly how much Russian crime money is being kept in Switzerland, and figuring that out is one of the goals of the new agreement, del Ponte and Skuratov said at a joint news conference. "If I knew that, I would be a very happy lawyer," del Ponte told reporters. "Switzerland is above all interested in getting Russia's information on people suspected in laundering money in Switzerland," del Ponte said. The sides also agreed to form a joint task force to investigate organized crime activities, share information and analyze the crime situation in the two countries, Skuratov said. Del Ponte also said that Swiss police has completed the investigation of the case against one of top reputed Russian mafia bosses, Sergei Mikhailov, who was arrested in Geneva in October, 1996, after warrants were issued in the United States, Israel and Belgium. Mikhailov is charged with involvement in organized crime and money laundering. The case will soon be brought to trial, del Ponte said. (ad/jai)