BEIRUT, Lebanon (AP) _ Lebanese guerrillas attacked Israeli forces in southern Lebanon on Saturday while civilians flocked to rallies around the country to mark 20 years of Israeli occupation. Lebanon's president, prime minister and national assembly speaker held talks with Syrian leaders in Damascus on Israel's proposal to withdraw its 1,500 troops from southern Lebanon. The talks were seen as aimed at coordinating the Lebanese and Syrian views ahead of a visit by U.N. Secretary General Kofi Annan. Both Beirut and Damascus have already rejected Jerusalem's proposal, which makes a withdrawal conditional on Lebanese guarantees that guerrillas would not attack northern Israel. Guerrillas of the Iranian-backed Hezbollah group mounted attacks on positions of Israeli troops and their allied Lebanese militiamen in the occupied zone, Lebanese officials said. There was no word on casualties. Hezbollah and the Hezbollah -backed Lebanese Resistance Brigades said in statements issued here that their guerrillas had attacked positions at Sojod, Hardon, Baarchit, Hadatha and Soweida. Thousands turned out for rallies in Beirut, and the cities of Sidon and Tyre and the town of Nabatiyeh in the south. In Sidon, the capital of southern Lebanon, local politicians such as the prime minister's sister, legislator Bahia Hariri, denounced Israel's occupation and called for the implementation of U.N. Security Council Resolution 425. Passed in 1978, the resolution calls on Israel to withdraw its forces from Lebanon. Speakers vowed that guerrillas would continue their "resistance" against Israeli forces until the occupation ended. In Beirut, legislator Mohammed Beydoun, warned the crowd that Israel might attack Lebanon again "with the aim of torpedoing resolution 425." A group calling itself the March 14 Solidarity Day with Occupied Southern Lebanon published a full-page advertisement in The Daily Star which described the world's failure to make Israel comply with resolution 425 as a "record of disgrace." It was on March 14, 1978, that some 25,000 Israeli troops invaded south Lebanon in a campaign against Palestinian guerrillas, who had attacked a town in northern Israel. Five days later, the Security Council adopted Resolution 425. Huge yellow banners hung across intersections in Beirut where motorists strung yellow ribbons from their aerials. In Lebanon, yellow is the symbol of support for resolution 425. In the eastern city of Baalbek, government buildings sported yellow banners and Hezbollah supporters roamed the streets soliciting funds for "the resistance." Outside the city, Hezbollah activists burned Israel's flag on the main road. Thousands of Lebanese civilians and militants and nearly 900 Israeli soldiers have been killed since 1978. Since 1985 Israel has occupied a strip of land along the border amounting to 10 percent of Lebanese territory. Israel, which maintains the strip with some 2,500 local militiamen, says the zone is a necessary buffer against guerrilla attacks. But increasing casualties _ a record 39 Israeli troops were killed in action in Lebanon last year _ have generated grassroots pressure among Israelis for the government to make a unilateral withdrawal.