LAGOS, Nigeria (AP) _ An explosion has rocked the southwestern university town of Ife killing at least six people, Radio Lagos reported Friday. Initial reports said the explosion late Thursday night had occurred in the nearby city of Ilesha, about 200 kilometers (125 miles) northeast of the commercial capital Lagos. Several other people were wounded. The cause of the blast was not given, but the radio report said it was similar to an explosion one night earlier that killed three people in a Lagos suburb. The town's military governor on Friday inspected the site of the explosion in Ife, but few details were made public. Authorities have not said whether either explosion was caused by a bomb, but church leaders and opponents of Nigeria's ruling military junta have warned of violence if the army does not step down from power. Thursday's blast came just days before nationwide voting in legislative elections _ part of a transition process from military to civilian rule in Nigeria. Opponents have called the transition a sham and have vowed to boycott voting in Saturday's legislative polls and in presidential elections later this year. Bomb experts in Lagos, meanwhile, were sifting through debris from a blast Wednesday night that left a huge crater in a residential street. Victims in that explosion were outside watching a soccer match on a television that had been placed in a neighbor's yard when the explosion occurred. Hours earlier, a senior Roman Catholic leader warned of violence in Nigeria if military ruler Gen. Sani Abacha becomes president later this year. Abacha, a devout Muslim, has very little support in the country's south, where Christians say they face discrimination and repression from the military junta. Opposition and pro-democracy groups are outraged at the recent unanimous presidential nominations of Abacha by Nigeria's five political parties. Most of his opponents have said the nomination process was rigged to eliminate any competition. Presidential elections will now take the form of a referendum to vote for or against Abacha's uncontested nomination. Abacha seized power in a bloodless 1993 coup and has since faced international criticizing for rampant human rights abuses and refusing to hand power over to a civilian government.