COPENHAGEN, Denmark (AP) _ Denmark's largest industrial unions have rejected a wage proposal, setting the stage for a nationwide general strike, officials announced Friday. State mediator Asbjoern Jensen announced that 56 percent of those voting on the proposal turned it down. The rejection means a general strike is likely to begin on Monday, barring last-minute government intervention that could stave it off. Prime Minister Poul Nyrup Rasmussen rejected media speculation that a strike would force the postponement of the May 28 referendum on the European Union's Amsterdam treaty. A postponement had been widely expected in case of a strike. Many observers believed the government would not risk placing the treaty before Denmark's voters _ who are perpetually uneasy with the EU _ during a period of disorder. Nyrup Rasmussen also said the government would not intervene in a strike. If a strike includes workers who stay off the job in sympathy with the unions who rejected the pact, an estimated 400,000 people could be involved. That could bring the country to a virtual halt. A general strike would quickly ramify throughout Europe. Copenhagen is the main air transport hub for the Nordic region and Denmark is the primary route for Norwegian and Swedish exports to reach the rest of Europe. "The strike came out of the blue," said Ask Hamstrup, an office clerk heading into a supermarket. "This means that we have to hamster," he said, referring to the rodents' practice of storing food in their cheeks. The Central Organization of Industrial Employees members' rejection of the two-year wage pact came as a surprise. Most observers had expected the unions would approve the compromise agreement worked out in March with the Confederation of Danish Industries. The package included an extra paid day off, pension contributions increasing by 0.9 percent per year and the minimum wage would increase by 2 kroner (28 cents) over the next two years. The minimum wage is 76.40 kroner (dlrs 10.6) an hour.