PARIS (AP) - Christian Lacroix took his big audience on a time-warp rollercoaster ride at his Saturday show in the Louvre's Carrousel area. It started out looking vaguely back to the 1940s with some "Evita" hairdos, short flared skirts, a few sharply-tailored shoulders in day wear. But then, there was not much day wear, and clothes soon went into Belle Epoque evenings, via a modern "star trek" of fabulous pearled fabrics. Minimalism, so fashionable on international runways these days, just does not grab Christian Lacroix. "After ten years, we must find a balance between glamour and efficiency," said Jean-Jacques Picart, Lacroix's partner on the business side, though the house is under the LVMH (Louis Vuitton Moet Hennesy) umbrella. The glamour will undoubtedly not die out. There were few clothes for day wear in this dressy collection that tended to the too-fussy, as Lacroix often does. What to make of a trouser suit with its tweedy masculine trousers and ruffled lace-organza Victorian blouse? Or the very tight sequin-spattered knit dress with its faux mink appliques and high feathered hat? And with the spangled tights shown with all the short clothes, the show often teetered between the boulevard hooker territory and the disco. But there were many wonderful moments here, including an excellent short carmine moire silk coat tied at the waist over a sky-blue lace knit dress. Big fur collars and long tweed coats, the gold-black tiger-striped lame trapeze coat, some of the great frock coats, and a remarkable tie-dye effect silk in skirts and floppy 1930s pants, looked like winners. Sharply-fitted evening suits with pants had large, structured shoulders. Lacroix has evolved quite far away from his famous shawl and sloped shoulder looks of opening days over 10 years ago. The most modern-looking clothes were simply-cut soft gowns and trouser outfits in black, gray and white pearled and diamante fabrics with a milky way effect. And the party scene was complete in the Victorians or southern belle evening styles capped by a fabulous red velvet gown with crinolines and decollete a la Scarlet O'Hara, draped like curtains and topped by a little red topper riding hat. Earlier, Jean-Paul Gaultier went yet again to the Arctic Circle for inspiration - as he did some years ago - but Friday night's offering was brilliant. The atmosphere was hot and smoky, a bar scene created in the Wagram dance hall, notorious for the "Last Tango in Paris." But the models, including Naomi Campbell, were dressed up like Nanook of the North as they cavorted, smoked, drank champagne and kibitzed with the audience at the bar. There were many of those Siberian hats with flaps, fur, even sequins at the end, and the parkas were very good-looking, many quite tailored, in black and white. Some of the impressions were of hippies from outer space, but in spite of some crazy combinations like a layered look with long ethnic skirt, fringed tunic and striped blazer, there was much to admire. The folklore Nordic knits were handsome, in sweaters, or knee-length pants, and might have been topped by something like a super taffeta full coat. An excellent full gray knit sleeveless tunic with its straight white pants was another winner. A double-faced gray coat with its trouser suit was impeccable. For evening wear at the North Pole, girls could dress up in handsome Nordic sweaters and full iridescent taffeta skirts, or top one of the full striped skirts with a terrific short beige trench coat. "I loved the show," said eminent English fashion historian Colin McDowell. "It was indeed Nanook of the North - with a trace of existentialism." (sp-dgs)