UNITED NATIONS (AP) _ Recalling U.N. failures in Africa, Security Council members said Friday the international community must demonstrate the political will to help Africa overcome its economic and social problems. The calls came during an all-day debate on Africa to review Secretary-General Kofi Annan's report last week, in which he outlined goals for the United Nations in assisting the world's most under-developed continent. In that report, Annan, the first sub-Saharan African to head the United Nations, said African leaders must demonstrate the political will to combat corruption, protect human rights and pursue sound economic policies. At the same time, Annan said, the international community must respond by investing in Africa and by intervening to end armed conflicts and restore stability. Echoing Annan's comments, Portugal's U.N. ambassador, Antonio Monteiro, said "political will is needed from the international community" to help Africa overcome its political problems. "And will and courage is very much needed to avoid future situations in which the United Nations is unfortunately seen to have turned its back on the African people," Monteiro said. "Concrete measures should be considered to ensure that the United Nations and the Security Council in particular provide a timely response to impending crises." But the council's willingness to intervene in African crises was weakened by the disastrous failure of the U.N. peacekeeping operation in Somalia in 1993. The deaths of 18 American soldiers in a gunbattle in Mogadishu in 1993 led the United States to withdraw from the operation and impose stringent conditions on future U.N. peacekeeping missions. U.N. officials have complained those conditions have made it nearly impossible for the United Nations to respond quickly to African crises. They point to the U.S. stand as one of the main reasons for the laggard U.N. response to the 1994 massacre of up to a half million Rwandan Tutsis and moderate Hutus by Hutu extremists. The Security Council was also unable to intervene decisively in last year's rebellion in the Congo, formerly Zaire, and in the Republic of Congo, where a former dictator overthrew an elected president. "The experience of intervention in Somalia was a bitter one but that of non-intervention in Rwanda was perhaps worse," British Ambassador John Weston told the council. He cited the U.N. success in supervising the transition of Eastern Slavonia from Serb to Croat control as an example of how the United Nations could be effective "given the right mandates and resources." Weston said proposals for shifting peacekeeping to regional organizations _ as proposed by the Clinton Administration _ "cannot substitute for the U.N." "What we need is an active partnership with Africa," he said. France's U.N. ambassador, Alain Dejammet, said France was "prepared to respond and work" with its U.N. partners on a more effective role in Africa, despite the French drawdown of military forces on the continent. The Security Council asked Annan to prepare the report following a meeting on Africa held in September during the annual General Assembly debate. The United States sought the meeting to draw international attention to the problems facing Africa. Annan said he would deliver that message during a visit to eight African countries _ Ethiopia, Djibouti, Kenya, Tanzania, Rwanda, Burundi, Uganda and Eritrea _ starting Wednesday.