PRISTINA, Yugoslavia (AP) _ He's a company director who wears the best suits, collects fine art and counts the influential among his friends. She's a worn-out refugee who sleeps under a borrowed blanket. Elsewhere, Boban Boskovic, chief executive of the Plastika factory, would have nothing in common with Ilinka Durbaba, stuck in a refugee camp for nearly three years. In Kosovo, they shoulder a common burden. They are Serbs in a part of Serbia controlled by a hostile Albanian majority that outnumbers them 9 to 1. And while the Albanians groan under repressive Serbian rule, the average Serb in Kosovo feels threatened by the specter of a secessionist war. The United States and other world powers consider the Kosovo Albanians victims, and back their struggle for autonomy, if not for independence. The Albanians lost the right to virtual self-rule in 1989. Most recently, Serb police killed at least 80 of them in a brutal two-week crackdown on militant separatists. As sympathy grows for the Albanians, hostility rises against Serbs, who often are equated with their repressive government. But in Kosovo, Serbs, too, are victims. Most work at low-paying government jobs or state companies that often cannot meet payroll. Albanians, victims of mass firings in the early 1990s, now dominate the private sector, their prosperity reflected in large houses and modern stores. Kosovo Serbs are a despised minority on home ground. But they cannot leave _ to keep them there, the government has forbidden property sales. Milica Boskovic, the director's wife, flinches when an Albanian boy spits at her. "This isn't the worst of it," she says. Other Serb parents nod. They walk their children to school, fearful of abuse from Albanian kids. The school is split by a wall _ one side for Serbs, the other for Albanians. "Their kids swear at our kids," says Mrs. Boskovic, mother of 7 - and 8-year old boys. At the Plastika factory, Boban Boskovic says he does what he can for harmony _ half his work force is ethnic Albanian. Loyalties were forged after the plant burned down in 1983, one of several fires thought set by Albanian separatists. Boskovic called a workers' meeting ahead of rebuilding. "I told them, 'Here, I am your Tito, your Milosevic, your Rugova,"' said Boskovic, referring respectively to the leader of the former communist Yugoslavia, who gave Kosovo automony; his successor who took it away, and the ethnic Albanian leader now seeking independence. "You've all got mouths to feed, whether they are Serb or Albanian." Born and raised in Kosovo, Boskovic is proud of his roots in the province, the cradle of Serb culture and Orthodox religion. Pictures in his lavish office show him with archbishops, Serb royalty _ and Zeljko Raznatovic, a.k.a Arkan, the Serb ultranationalist whose troops are accused of atrocities in Croatia, Bosnia, and, most recently, Kosovo. "Where would I go?" he replies, when asked if he is contemplating leaving. "We must talk to them," he says of the Albanians. "We should have talked to them a long time ago." At the hairdresser's, Serb women discuss options. Stay or go? They reflect on their good times in the 1950s and 1960s, and what they view as Tito's greatest mistake _ giving Kosovo autonomy in 1974. That, a high Albanian birthrate and an influx from neighboring Albania left the Serbs cornered by the 1980s. "We had everything," says Zhivka Savic, 65. "They had nothing." The reverse seems true now. The two-chair salon is squeezed among modern, well-equipped Albanian shops. "Compare my little house to a six-story Albanian one," Mrs. Savic rails, ignoring warnings from other women to hush because of the thin wall and the Albanian shop next door. "Sell to an Albanian? In a minute, if they let us." "In my street,... Albanian kids have started chanting 'we are the terrorists." Hairdresser Milanka Milentijevic says 80 percent of her customers were Albanians in the 1970s. "Now, I have one a month. Business is down 95 percent," she says. "Even the Serbs who could afford to come left a long time ago." About 200 of her relatives have left the area, but Mrs. Milentijevic wants to stay _ for now. She describes Albanian acquaintances as "friends in hiding." "We talk about everything. Families, politics," says Mrs. Milentijevic, 50. "Sometimes we even joke about the situation." Mrs. Durbaba, the refugee, contemplates her options. Sitting on a cot in a space blanketed off from the next family, she says she started running at 3, from the Germans during World War II. In 1995, she fled her town of Knin in Croatia, when Croats recaptured it from rebel Serbs, who had seized it in 1991. Is it time to run again? "I have nowhere to go," she says, sobbing. She turns to a poster of Slobodan Milosevic, the Yugoslav president. He stoked the war that forced her to flee Knin and his decision to abolish Kosovo's autonomy radicalized the Albanians. "I love him," says Mrs. Durbaba. "He's good for everybody who loves peace."