WASHINGTON _ Investigators from the office of independent counsel Kenneth Starr questioned Monica Lewinsky's mother again Friday but outside the foreboding confines of the grand jury room, according to lawyers close to Starr's inquiry. The renewed questioning of Ms. Lewinsky's mother, Marcia Lewis, appeared to reflect Starr's pledge to press on with his investigation of whether President Clinton had a sexual relationship with Ms. Lewinsky, a former White House intern, then encouraged her and others to lie about it _ accusations that the president has repeatedly denied. At the same time, Starr's decision to question Ms. Lewis away from the grand jury could reflect the prosecutor's desire to avoid a repeat of the public relations disaster of February, when she was so unnerved by going before the grand jury that she left in a state of near-collapse, generating wide sympathy for herself and for her daughter. Starr's office did not return a telephone call seeking comment on the questioning of Ms. Lewis and about renewed criticism of his investigative tactics, including his subpoena of bookstore records to determine whether Lewinsky might have given books as gifts to the president. William Ginsburg, Ms. Lewinsky's lawyer, also declined comment Friday on the latest questioning of Ms. Lewis. It could not be determined what was asked and whether Ms. Lewis made any concessions to the prosecutor in return for being spared the ordeal of going before the grand jury again. Friday, the president was still savoring his victory of two days earlier, the dismissal of Paula Jones ' sexual-misconduct suit against him, when he was asked on the White House lawn for his reaction to a report that Starr may change his whole strategy. According to U.S. News &AMP; World Report, some people in Starr's office want the grand jury to indict Ms. Lewinsky and name the president as an unindicted co-conspirator. That way, the findings against Clinton would have a public airing in a courtroom, but there would be no need to address the unanswered constitutional issue of whether a sitting president can be indicted. Other aides to Starr favor turning the evidence over to Congress, according to the magazine, which reported on the supposed debate in Starr's office on the Internet. Those aides are said to feel that leaving the president's fate to Congress _ assuming there is sufficient evidence to charge him _ would be the best course, even though many political observers doubt that Congress would impeach Clinton in this election year, especially since he is enjoying high ratings in the polls. Asked at a news conference Friday about the article, Clinton declined to comment. Starr has been under mounting criticism since a federal judge in Little Rock, Ark., threw out the suit by Mrs. Jones, a former Arkansas state employee who contends that then-Governor Clinton made a lewd proposal to her in a hotel room in 1991 _ accusations Clinton has denied. Starr has said that his investigation will go on, regardless of the dismissal of the suit. They are separate matters, although it has often been difficult to tell how separate. Starr's inquiry began as an investigation into financial dealings of Clinton and his wife, Hillary Rodham Clinton, years ago in Arkansas and has delved in recent months into Clinton's sexual behavior. The people involved in the Jones suit and in the episodes that Starr has been studying have occasionally overlapped. Starr's attempt to learn more about Ms. Lewinsky's book-buying was the subject of a hearing in Washington on Friday before U.S. District Judge Norma Holloway Johnson. Starr has subpoenaed the records of Kramerbooks and Afterwords, an independent store in Washington's Dupont Circle neighborhood, as well as records from Barnes &AMP; Noble, to review Ms. Lewinsky's book purchases of the past two and a half years. That is roughly the time in which she is said to have told friends, including one who taped her phone calls, that she had a relationship with Clinton. Friday's hearing dealt only with the Kramerbooks subpoena, and it saw lawyers for Ms. Lewinsky and for Kramerbooks standing in unity. "She's not been charged with anything," one of Ms. Lewinsky's lawyers, Nathaniel Speights, said, asserting that his client "has the right to have her privacy protected by this court." "Our ability to read is exactly what the founding fathers had in mind when the Bill of Rights was written," Pamela Bethel, a lawyer for Kramerbooks, argued. But Robert Bittman, a lawyer from Starr's office, said the grand jury needed the list of purchases Ms. Lewinsky made in order to corroborate other evidence. "It's not the books part, it's the exchanging of gifts that we're looking at," Bittman said. Ms. Johnson said she would rule in about a week.