CHICAGO _ With two outs in the top of the seventh inning on Friday at Wrigley Field, the sold-out crowd rose to its feet and began to cheer, eagerly anticipating the seventh-inning stretch and a tradition made famous at this park by the legendary announcer Harry Caray. But following Caray's death two months ago at 83, Cubs fans turned out at the team's home opener on Friday to listen to his widow, Dutchie, sing "Take Me Out to the Ball Game," which her husband had spent 16 years crooning to the delight of adoring, jubilant fans. The cheers and chants of "Harry, Harry," grew louder and the intensity increased so much in the seventh inning that when Montreal's Chris Widger hit a routine fly ball to Chicago's Sammy Sosa in right field, Sosa dropped it, prolonging the wait. In the broadcast booth, Mrs. Caray waited nervously for her debut. It wasn't until after a walk of the following batter and a pitching change that the half -inning finally ended and she assumed the spot Harry Caray had made famous, leaning out of the booth, microphone waving. Her voice was lost among the 39,102 fans, all of whom were singing along. As the song ended, balloons were released over the field as "Amazing Grace" played over the loudspeakers. "He was guiding me," she said following her performance. "It was a great feeling. To see how much these fans loved Harry is just amazing." The day was an all-out tribute to Harry Caray, whose love for the game and eccentric personality brought fans from all over to watch a team known for losing. Indeed, his caricatured face that has come to resemble "fun at the old ball park," was omnipresent here on Friday. His face appeared on a patch on players' sleeves, his trademark glasses were worn by fans, and a giant poster of him hung above his broadcast booth, now occupied by his 33-year -old grandson, Chip. With a moment of silence before the game, he was remembered by the people he exemplified: baseball fans. "Today was a day I was looking forward to for a long time," Chip Caray said before the game. "It was supposed to be the first day my grandpa and I worked together." The Cubs have lined up a number of celebrities to come in and sing, including Ernie Banks on Saturday. Also on tap: the comedian Jay Leno, the film critic Roger Ebert, the singer Lou Rawls, the Olympic speed-skater Bonnie Blair, and the former Chicago Bear Walter Payton. Many of the Cubs faithful would tell you that Harry Caray was there, maybe even pulling a few strings as Chicago beat the Expos, 6 - 2, improving its record to 3 - 1. Perhaps it was the 18-mph wind blowing straight in from center field (Steve Trachsel, the Cubs ' starting pitcher, led the National League in home runs allowed last year), or the fact that Trachsel himself had three runs batted in. "Harry would have been very happy with today," said Matt Wolf, who traveled from North Carolina with his wife, Laura, for the game. "We normally come up for two or three games a year, but we knew we had to be here for this. It was just wild."