MINNEAPOLIS _ With a smiling, joyous performance that bore none of the caution she displayed at the Nagano Olympics, Michelle Kwan decisively won the women's short program Friday at the world figure skating championships. On an otherwise inelegant afternoon, when only four of the 30 skaters delivered clean programs, Kwan received a perfect mark of 6 for artistry from the Canadian judge. Inexplicably, one judge placed Kwan second, but the other eight placed her where she clearly belonged _ in first, over Anna Rechnio of Poland and Laetitia Hubert of France. Skating to a Rachmaninoff piano trio and concerto, Kwan showed none of the deliberateness that cost her a gold medal at the Winter Games in Nagano, Japan, in February. She was elegant, confident and fast on Friday, with exquisite position and flow in her triple lutz-double toe combination and with a graceful, extended spiral that drew customary applause from the audience at the Target Center. She wobbled slightly upon landing her double axel, but otherwise Kwan was at her self-assured best. Tara Lipinski, the Olympic gold medalist, was absent, having withdrawn with sickness and fatigue. But Lipinski had not defeated Kwan in a short program this season, and it was unlikely that she could have prevailed Friday. "Knowing that the world championships were in my home country meant a lot," said Kwan, who is 17 and lives in Lake Arrowhead, Calif. "When I stepped on the ice, I saw the American flags and the banners and I wanted to give the audience the joy and freedom that I have on the ice." Saturday's long program will be worth two-thirds of the scoring. Kwan is a heavy favorite to win her second world title. Her main challengers are the unlikely Rechnio and Hubert, who finished 19th and 20th, respectively, at the Olympics. Rechnio, 20, did not even qualify for the previous two world championships, where her best career finish is 14th. She had trained for several seasons in Marlboro, Mass., but this season she returned to Warsaw, changed coaches, got injured and missed the European championships. Now healthy, she landed spectacular jumps Friday and vaulted into second place. Hubert, 23, is an all-or-nothing skater. At the 1992 Winter Games in her native France, she fell a half-dozen times in the long program and was nicknamed "The Human Zamboni." At the Nagano Games, she became so deflated with her poor jumping that she appeared on the verge of stopping in the middle of her long program. But she also defeated Lipinski at Trophy Lalique in Paris last November. Friday, Hubert was one of only two skaters to land a triple-triple combination. Julianna Beke, the Hungarian judge, even placed her first, ahead of Kwan. Kwan's only problem came in the draw for Saturday's long program. She drew first in the final group of skaters, which she had done at the Winter Olympics. "We'll have to go home and work on that," Kwan said with a laugh.