As a freshman in college some 30 years ago, I was a literature major with a problem: I had a token science requirement to fulfill. The solution? I took a course titled "Primitive Art." It was taught by the anthropology department, and classes were held in the local museum of natural history, where African sculptures were jumbled in with geological specimens and stuffed birds. The status of those sculptures has changed over time. Today, more often than not, they've found a home in art museums. African art as a field of study is listed under art history, and no field of research is more stimulating or innovative. And none carries so heavy a burden of misconceptions. One of these has to do with the identity of African artists. Colonial collectors rarely took note of who carved the spectacular statues and masks they shipped back to Europe. Modern ethnology, with which the study of African art still overlaps, concentrates on social traditions and belief systems rather than things, and seldom has an eye out for authorship. For whatever reason, the idea has long been current in the West that anonymity in art was a cultural norm in Africa. By this thinking, African art is a collective, tribal phenomenon rather than a vehicle for individual expression, and objects of a specific type are _ making allowances for varying degrees of skill _ interchangeable. This view is being challenged head-on by two exhibitions, one in Washington and the other at the Metropolitan Museum of Art in New York. Both shows argue that historically, certain traditional Africa artists have not only developed distinctive styles but that those styles were greatly prized within their communities, creating a celebrity that often lived on long after the artists had died. Of the two exhibitions, "Olowe of Ise: A Yoruba Sculptor to Kings" at the National Museum of African Art, Smithsonian Institution is, by its very nature, the more closely focused. Organized by Roslyn A. Walker, director of the museum, it is a retrospective of a single sculptor who was born around 1875, and died around 1938. One-person shows of Africa artists are rare (the Metropolitan Museum's "Buli Master" show, organized by Susan Vogel in 1980, is one of the few other examples). And Ms. Walker's exhibition is truly precedent setting in being accompanied by a catalogue raisonne of Olowe's work, the first major scholarly publication of its kind ever devoted to a traditional African artist. As the book itself suggests, biographical data on Olowe of Ise (pronounced o-lo-way of EE-say) is scant, mostly found in local "praise songs" composed in his honor and passed down orally through his descendants, or in chance scraps of information recorded by colonial visitors. He was born in southwestern Nigeria of Yoruba people, the ethnic groups from which many African-Americans are descended. He spent most of his life working in the court center of Ise, though he took commissions from clients as far as 60 miles away. He was expert in a variety of forms of carving, from architectural decorations to diviner's instruments to children's toys, all of which are among the 35 objects in Washington. Olowe gained attention in Europe when an elaborate palace door he had made was displayed in the British Empire Exhibition of 1927 and later acquired by the British Museum. After World War II, an English official saw a picture of the door and related its distinctive style to work he had encountered in Nigeria. He alerted the ethnographer William B. Fagg to his discovery, thus setting in motion the investigation that has culminated in Ms. Walker's show. The British Museum door is not in Washington for the exhibition, which runs through Sept. 7, but two others by Olowe are, each carved with reliefs of dozens of figures arranged in horizontal bands. The first door depicts the everyday bustle of court life: the ruler, short but commanding, appears accompanied by two wives, one wearing a European-style top hat. A band of eager-to-please musicians serenades him from above; a wrestling match is in progress below. The other door documents a specific event: the turn-of-the-century meeting between a British commissioner named Captain Ambrose and the King of Ise. Here two cultures, closely observed, come together. Ambrose, a childlike figure in a cricketing cap, is toted in on a litter from the left. The king, a prepossessing presence in a towering crown, arrives on a horse from the right and greets his guest with a magisterially upraised hand. Many of the characteristics of Olowe's personal style are here: the unusually high relief carving, deep-cut and verging on the three -dimensional; figures with limbs modeled and flexed to give an impression of movement, and surfaces inflected with painterly chipping and faceting. All of these features are also found in the extraordinary veranda posts that Olowe produced for his royal patrons. Where other artists working with this form carved their stacked-up figures face-front and locked within the column, Olowe often twists them in different directions, sets their limbs free in space and enlivens them with personable details: a young king has the sweet, alert face of a gazelle; a hunter, rifle in hand, wears his hair in a thick braid, which curves out behind him like a bow. Even more radical is the way Olowe plays with visual and social conventions. In several sculptures he reverses or blends gender roles, giving male figures women's hairdos and dressing them in the beaded girdles worn by brides. Why he did so is a mystery, but one can assume that, like any inventive artist intent on making a name for himself, he upset expectations both to arrest the eye and to keep his public wondering what on earth he would be up to next. The show, which has been evocatively installed with mural-size photographs showing the veranda posts in situ decades ago, ends with some of the artist's smaller pieces, including wooden bowls with cunningly wrought openwork bases and figural motifs seen nowhere else in African art. The bowls have none of the monumental flair of Olowe's posts and doors, but they are his most frequently imitated work and are unmistakable reminders of his self-consciously virtuosic and original presence. Originality is also the subject of "Master Hand: Individuality and Creativity Among Yoruba Sculptors," a compact think piece of an exhibition at the Met, organized by Alisa LaGamma, assistant curator for the department of the arts of Africa, Oceania and the Americas. A visual essay on the question of authorship in African art, it expands beyond the crucial figure of Olowe to touch on numerous other Yoruba artists whose work can be identified either through style or documentation. One of them, Areogun (circa 1880 - 1954), was Olowe's near contemporary. A door carved by him is installed for purposes of stylistic comparison in the Washington show, and the signature image of figures zipping around on bicycles seen there can also be spotted on a large divination bowl at the Met as part of a tableau of human and animals forms woven together in a vibrant chain of activity. Most of the other artists in "Master Hand" were born, like Olowe and Areogun, in the late 19th century and died in the 20th. And collectively their work attests to the endlessly inventive sophistication of Yoruba art, with its startling interweaving of tradition and modernity. That blend is everywhere. One sees it in a headdress, attributed to Onabanjo, carrying a whole community of figures and touched with baroque flourishes suggesting New World influences carried back to Africa by returning slaves. It is there in a helmet mask, attributed to Bamgbose or Areogun, topped with the formidable figure of a women flanked by children who reverently touch her breasts. And again in the little dance mask with movable arms, begun by the sculptor Fagbite Asamu in 1930 and completed four decades later by his son Falola Edun. Directly across from the vitrine holding this mask is a video monitor playing 1971 footage of Falola Edun finishing his work on it and then of the mask being worn in a dance, its role as a piece of public art finally realized. Seeing both the Yoruba artist and the sculpture he made "live" on tape is very moving, and serves as reminder of the restorative, vivifiying impulse that lies behind the two exhibitions themselves. The Met supplemented "Master Hand," which runs through July 12, with a symposium in February on the question of authorship in Africa art. Among the speakers many individual voices sounded, including that of Olabiyi Babalola Yai from the University of Miami, one of the many Yoruba scholars who are documenting and interpreting their own art. And appropriately, artists were on hand. The Nigerian sculptor Lamidi Fakeye, who had given a carving demonstration in the museum the day before, was in the audience. The symposium was rounded out with the appearance of three contemporary Western artists _ Jose Bedia, Arturo Lindsay and Manuel Vega _ all of whom live in the United States, but draw on Yoruba-derived African-Caribbean religious traditions in their art. It was an absorbing, exhausting day, one packed with fresh information, contentious ideas (one scholar suggested that the issue of determining authorship in African art was a Western obsession geared to museums and markets), and, inevitably, with new misconceptions that only further research will set straight. And it felt a very long way indeed from the dusty vitrines and taxidermic science of 30 years ago, when African artists were barely spoken of as artists at all, and the energy of their work was, for one unexpectedly captivated student, a transformative secret just beginning to be revealed.