BELFAST, Northern Ireland _ British Prime Minister Tony Blair flew into Northern Ireland on Tuesday in an urgent effort to remove a serious snag in the peace negotiations between Protestant and Roman Catholic political leaders in this mostly Protestant British province. "I feel the hand of history upon our shoulders," Blair said on arriving at Hillsborough, a government residence south of Belfast, for a meeting with David Trimble, the Protestant unionist leader who raised the new obstacle on Tuesday morning. "It's right to try," Blair said. "I'm here to try." Although his office insisted that Blair had been scheduled to arrive in Belfast on Tuesday, it was believed here that his arrival had been moved up from Wednesday in response to the potential new crisis. Trimble said a set of proposals given to the negotiating parties early Tuesday was unacceptable, a rejection that was widely seen as a melodramatic tactic to take the initiative in peace talks. But the tactic could backfire and push the talks to the brink of a collapse, which would probably turn the melodrama into the tragedy of widespread violence by the main Catholic and Protestant guerrilla groups, which are now observing cease-fires. Sectarian violence has killed more than 3,200 people in the North since 1969. The deadline for an agreement intended to end 800 years of sectarian violence in Ireland has been set for midnight Thursday. And former U.S. Sen. George Mitchell, D- Maine, the chairman of the talks, said Tuesday morning that the deadline would not be extended and that his job was virtually over after nearly two years. The prime minister arrived hours after the latest, and most serious, obstacle to agreement was advanced by Trimble, the leader of the Protestant Ulster Unionist Party. Trimble said the proposals, which were put forward by Mitchell and have not been made public, were biased in favor of the two Catholic parties, the mainstream Social Democratic Labor and Sinn Fein, the political wing of the Irish Republican Army. Blair sought to reassure Protestants by noting that it was British and Irish policy that there will be no united Ireland _ the ultimate goal of the IRA _ unless it is approved by a majority. The Northern Ireland majority is likely to remain Protestant well into the next century. Once Trimble makes his own proposals in the next two days, the predictable reaction would be rejection by Sinn Fein and possibly the Social Democrats and a rush of last-ditch negotiations to get a compromise agreement by midnight Thursday. <ANNOTATION> (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) </ANNOTATION> The Catholics would seek support from the Irish Republic's Prime Minister Bertie Ahern, while Protestants look to Blair to argue for them. The Catholics want an agreement that would increase their political power in a new elected lawmaking assembly that would be part of the drastic changes in Northern Ireland's political structure that is envisioned in Mitchell's proposals. They also want a new cross-border North-South Council, with ministers from Northern Ireland and the Irish Republic, that would be authorized to make binding decisions in the North's affairs. Now, the Irish Republic has only a marginal consultative role. Protestants bristle at these demands, seeing them as a way for the Catholics to create a united Ireland, free of British control and run from Dublin. The Mitchell proposals are known to cover these new government bodies. Protestants want weaker bodies that would be controlled by the Protestant majority that would elected to the new assembly. In a telephone call to Blair's London office, Trimble said, he said of the Mitchell proposals, "Before contemplating alternate proposals, I wish to know from you and the Irish government if you are prepared to consider radically different measures." The principal Protestant complaint with the Irish government, a sponsor of the talks with Britain, is that the Irish have refused to specify how they would tone down Ireland's constitutional claim to sovereignty in the North. Ahern, who was in Dublin on Tuesday for his mother's funeral, did not immediately comment on Trimble's rejection of the Mitchell proposals. The rejection was partly motivated by Trimble's need to stave off the vehement criticism by the Rev. Ian Paisley, who has kept his Democratic Unionist Party out of the talks. As Trimble was stating his rejection, Paisley was haranguing him in television interviews as a traitor who was selling out to Catholic terrorists. Trimble and Paisley compete for Protestant votes in general elections. In a new northern assembly, Trimble would be a likely candidate for prime minister. "You can't negotiate by stunts," said Seamus Mallon, deputy leader of the Social Democrats. "This is no stunt," said Jeffrey Donaldson, one of Trimble's Unionist Party allies. "This is for real."