NEW YORK _ It was easier for Chris Childs to be with the Nets two years ago. Less pressure, no hype. Having freedom from expectation meant wowing everyone as a playmaking guard with a freewheeling style. He lost his anonymity that summer when he signed a $24 million deal with the Knicks. He went just across the river, but to another world, as a high-profile point guard. He has been adjusting ever since. This injury-riddled season, in which he went from starter to backup, has been particularly difficult and increasingly dreadful for Childs. In his last three games, Childs has made four of 17 shots and committed seven turnovers in 68 minutes of playing time. "I'm not happy with the way I'm playing," Childs said after an 0 -for- 2, three-turnover performance against the Los Angeles Clippers on Thursday night. "I'm not getting the ball to the basket. My leg is not hurting as much as it did before, so I've got to get there. I'm going to play my game on Saturday." If he does, his return to the Childs of old will take place Saturday night at Continental Arena, where he was so comfortable with the Nets. As much as Childs has struggled as a Knick _ not clicking with either the Patrick Ewing -oriented offense or the current one without the injured center _ he is only half of the point guard problem. Charlie Ward, the starter, has also hit a season-low lull. At times, he has been clutch in his shots and smart in his passes off penetration. But over the same three games that Childs ' game has worsened, Ward's shooting has been worse. He has made one of 15 shots and is 0 for 5 from 3-point range. "I'm not really worried about their scoring," Knicks coach Jeff Van Gundy said. "Charlie is aggressive and looks for other guys. We just want to make sure he maintains the right balance and takes his own shot when he's open. "Chris has got to play through it and keep working." That means doing the extra shooting Van Gundy has been banging the drum for lately. As a team, particularly in the backcourt over the last week, the Knick players' shots have fallen hard on the rim. Now is not the time for an offensive swoon, not when the Knicks are trying to hold fast to a playoff position. Teams like the eighth-place Nets are in the chase for the Knicks ' No. 7 spot in the Eastern Conference. "Before, we were in the favorite's position," said Van Gundy, whose team held a three-and-a-half-game lead over the Nets. "They were always the underdog. I think that's all changed." So much has changed since Childs was with the Nets. With the Knicks, it is not so easy to be himself. "I was brought here for other aspects of my game; I've got to show that," said Childs, who admits the ankle that he sprained six weeks ago is not what is bothering him now. "I've been stagnate, not playing my game. That is going to end on Saturday." REBOUNDS Patrick Ewing continued to go through shooting drills Friday at practice and ran through some plays with the team. A team official said Thursday night that Ewing is expected to return to a full-contact practice within 10 days, the final step for a return before the playoffs. "I expect he'll practice before the end of the season at some point," Jeff Van Gundy said Friday before describing Ewing's workout. "When we went contact, he didn't play. If he's able to, contact would be the next step. It would be a huge step." Barring a setback to his surgically repaired shooting wrist, Ewing could be in uniform for one of the Knicks ' final regular-season games. Ewing's touch was in full view before the Knicks ' 81 - 70 victory over the Clippers on Thursday, when he shot 10 - to 18-foot jumpers for about half an hour and looked surprisingly smooth in his release.