NEW YORK _ Time has run out for the besieged Wells BDDP, the onetime Madison Avenue powerhouse that had recently stumbled into a stunning free fall as large clients left amid executive turmoil and ownership changes. GGT Group PLC, the parent of Wells, said on Friday that Wells would be closed after 32 years, effective on May 13. The shutdown will affect 133 employees in New York, though at the start of the year Wells had more than twice that number. Efforts will be made to place employees with affiliates of Omnicom Group, the giant agency company that agreed in late January to acquire GGT. They will be eligible for "at least six months to as much as a year" in severance pay, said John Wren, the president and chief executive at Omnicom in New York. The shutdown will abruptly end Wells ' battle for survival during which billings fell to less than $200 million from a peak of almost $1 billion seven years ago. Just since November, Wells has lost more than $330 million in billings from clients like Bristol-Myers Squibb, Heineken USA Inc., Liberty Mutual Insurance Co., Procter &AMP; Gamble Co. and Tag Heuer USA. The closing also ends more than three decades of advertising achievement that included such familiar campaigns as "Quality is Job 1" for Ford, "I can't believe I ate the whole thing" for Alka-Seltzer, "Oh, the disadvantages" for Benson &AMP; Hedges cigarettes and "A totally organic experience" for Clairol Herbal Essences shampoo. "Wells and the kind of work it did was one of the reasons I got into this business," said Steve Davis, who joined Wells only six weeks ago as chairman and chief executive after the dismissal of Frank Assumma. "To look at the agency's reel was to see the best and the brightest," Davis said. "But it got to the point there was not enough critical mass to keep going. "And for us to dance our way into a 'merger' with another agency would have been fairly transparent," he added, "because there's not that much left to merge with." The client roster of Wells and its affiliate, Moss/Dragoti, had dwindled to five accounts. With the closing date posted, four of the five have started leaving for other agencies; the fifth, Chase Manhattan Corp., had already placed its account in review. Omnicom moved to acquire GGT after the loss of Wells ' largest client, Procter &AMP; Gamble _ with billings estimated at $125 million _ plunged GGT into crisis. The hope had been widespread that Wells would somehow remain in business, perhaps as a unit of an Omnicom agency like DDB Needham Worldwide or TBWA Chiat/Day. But "there was virtually no revenue left" because of the substantial account losses, Wren said. That sealed Wells ' fate, on a Friday the 13th no less. <ANNOTATION> (STORY CAN END HERE _ OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) </ANNOTATION> "I feel terrible about this," said Charlie Moss, the chairman of Moss/Dragoti, who was one of the initial employees of Wells when it opened as Wells, Rich, Greene in 1966. "It's very sad to see it happen." "We should have a memorial service someday," he added, "to say goodbye in a nice way." Two clients that had been handled by Moss/Dragoti are headed for DDB Needham in New York along with Moss and his longtime partner, Stan Dragoti. One is Hertz Corp. and the other is the History Channel, the cable television network owned by Walt Disney Co., Hearst Corp. and the NBC unit of General Electric Co. Combined billings are estimated at more than $40 million. Ken Kaess, president of the DDB Needham U.S. division, was pleased to land two additional clients unexpectedly but was dismayed at the circumstances. "It's too bad," he said. "Wells is a terrific brand name." The Wells name had for years been burnished by Mary Wells Lawrence, whose fierce devotion to clients and creative instincts made her an advertising legend. Her fledgling agency grew quickly from the 1960s into the 1970s, attracting blue-chip clients like Ford Motor Co. ; ITT Sheraton Corp. ; IBM ; Miles Inc., now part of Bayer ; Philip Morris Cos. ; and P&AMP;G. "Mary created an environment and an attitude here," Davis said, "and underpinned it with great people who delivered on that promise. Wells could always be depended on for something new and different." But after the agency was sold in 1990 to BDDP, a French agency company, Ms. Lawrence withdrew from active involvement, and financial problems began to impede Wells ' performance. Wells then suffered through waves of account losses and management tumult as well as another change in ownership when BDDP was acquired last year by GGT. For instance, one six-month period in 1995 brought the sudden departures from Wells of the chairman and chief executive, the president and the chief financial officer. "It was a big roller coaster," said Linda Kaplan Thaler, who worked at Wells in a top creative post from 1994 to 1997. "I went on a maternity leave, and when I came back, nobody was there. "It was an unfortunate sequence of happenstances," she added. "No one person is responsible; everyone there had the best of intentions." Kaplan Thaler Group in New York, an advertising and production company that Ms. Kaplan Thaler opened after leaving Wells, is being awarded the account of another Wells client, Toys "R" Us, with billings estimated at $30 million to $40 million. Ms. Kaplan Thaler had worked for Toys "R" Us at Wells and at the J. Walter Thompson New York unit of WPP Group, where she wrote the Toys "R" Us jingle. Ms. Kaplan Thaler had been bound by a noncompetition agreement with Wells that expires in July. But the closing led Wells to waive the stricture so the account could move now. The fourth Wells account moving to another agency is the packaged paper-products division of Georgia-Pacific Corp., which arrived at Wells only last fall. Like Hertz and the History Channel, it is also leaving for an Omnicom -owned agency, the BBDO South unit of BBDO Worldwide. BBDO South in Atlanta, which handles corporate advertising for Georgia-Pacific, will assume additional duties for brands like Angel Soft toilet tissue and Sparkle paper towels, said Ken Haldin, a spokesman for Georgia-Pacific in Atlanta. Billings were estimated at $30 million to $40 million. Omnicom anticipates completing the acquisition of GGT in the next two weeks, Wren said, adding that he planned to sponsor a "three-day job fair to try to place as many Wells employees as possible" at Omnicom agencies and subsidiaries. "The employees are the innocent victims of all these events," he added. Davis, who said he would consider his next move after Wells closed, agreed with Wren. "I told the staff this didn't have anything to do with them," he said, referring to his remarks at a meeting at the Wells office on Friday afternoon. "I've never seen such passion and conviction in the face of having to read about the agency in the papers every day."