In the world of Internet search services, finding just the right business model is proving as elusive as finding an entirely relevant list of search results. But the effort can be seen on the Web sites of all the industry's most familiar names. Yahoo, the biggest of the dozens of sites devoted to navigating the Web, is looking more like a commercial online service every day, with "channels" that organize information into categories. Likewise, Excite and Lycos have also added chat rooms, electronic mail and a wide range of original content like news, financial services, shopping and local entertainment guides. And earlier this month, Infoseek announced its entry into electronic commerce, adding travel-booking and home-buying services. "The function of searching has become a commodity," said Alan Braverman, Internet analyst at Credit Suisse First Boston. "So search engine companies are making a transition into Internet media companies." And as they do, consumers are changing the way they use them. Search engines were originally developed to help Internet users find what they were looking for among the millions of pages on the World Wide Web, and as such they were judged solely by how well _ and how quickly _ they matched key words to results. Today, however, searching is only one small reason people go to sites like Yahoo, Lycos, Infoseek and Excite. On Yahoo, for example, only one out of three users goes there to search, said Jerry Yang, co-founder of the company, which is based in Santa Clara, Calif. The rest of the time, they go there to use other Yahoo features like e-mail or chat services or Yahoo Finance, which has become one of the most popular financial sites on the Web. "We certainly are becoming more online service-like," he said. "But that doesn't make our navigation service any less important." It does, however, mean visitors to sites like Yahoo and Excite tend to stay longer _ and potentially do more _ than if the site offered only searching. And that has translated into more advertising. Last year, Yahoo was the top ad-supported Web site for the second consecutive year, generating $53.2 million in advertising, according to the Electronic Advertising and Marketplace Report. That is up 180 percent from $19.0 million in 1996. Excite ranked second of all Web sites, generating $40.2 million in advertising in 1997. Despite a huge growth in advertising, profits have been elusive for all but Yahoo and Lycos, which had its first profitable quarter in 1997. Infoseek stumbled as it struggled with management changes, and has since refocused itself toward consumers rather than businesses. Excite lost money last year, though analysts appear bullish on its prospects. But while Yahoo and others are trying to turn their sites into destinations in themselves, an ambitious start-up is taking an entirely different approach. Goto.com, a spinoff of Idealab, a self-described business incubator based in Los Angeles, says it will focus entirely on searching and on making money by encouraging Web sites to pay for more prominent placement in the search results. Rather than ranking search results according to where and how often certain key words appear, as conventional search engines do, Goto.com actually ranks results according to how much sites are willing to pay. The service posts the per-word pricing in an open auction, allowing Web sites to continually bid for higher placement on a given topic. Goto.com then requests that visitors vote on the quality and relevance of search results _ information that is later used to improve future searches. Bill Gross, president of Idealab, said an important difference between his approach and that of other search sites was that Goto.com was not trying to become a media company. "They make money when you stay _ I make money when you leave," Gross said, comparing his service to the Yellow Pages. "We're changing the alignment of the proposition. We really are a true search engine." By letting a combination of market forces and user feedback determine the results of searches, Goto.com will actually provide better results, he said. "We're not letting a blind algorithm decide," Gross said. Gross said the Web had simply become too large for the conventional search approach of matching key words. But, his critics say, a true search engine is exactly what Goto.com is not. Its "pay for placement" approach leads to skewed results, they argue, particularly when the information being sought is not readily available on a commercial site. <ANNOTATION> (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) </ANNOTATION> Yet Gross insists that nonprofit groups, universities and even medical organizations will find it in their interests to pay for placement. "There's almost always a way that someone will make money by having you come to a site," he said. "Even if it's philanthropic, it wants your attention." And if some sites do not care to pay, they will still appear in the search result _ at the bottom of the list of paid sites. That way, at least, users will know where to find the smallest sites, rather than having them mixed in with larger, typically commercial sites. Perhaps one reason for industry skepticism is that "pay for placement" has already been tested. Two years ago, Open Text Corp., then a search service, allowed advertisers to pay for premium placement in search results. But the practice was quickly abandoned when consumers complained. "We got a pretty strong emotional response," said Abe Kleinfield, a vice president at Open Text, based in Waterloo, Ontario. "People thought it was immoral." But the difference in approach is important: Open Text did not tell users that it was allowing companies to pay for higher placement; Goto.com is open about the practice. But regardless of the approach, Goto.com may not succeed simply because it is so late to the market, analysts say. "I wouldn't be bullish on any newcomer," Braverman said. Success today comes from branding and distribution, and Yahoo and a few others are going to be tough competitors on both counts. "The main reason people go to Yahoo is habit," he said. Rather than embrace new entries, he said, the market is likely to favor more consolidation. Gross is confident that his strategy will work. "What these guys have is traffic, but they don't have a good business model," he said.