Charles Johnson, whose last novel, "Middle Passage" was a historical reconstruction of slavery, has turned to more recent history in "Dreamer," an imagined account of the last days of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. They are days filled with evil premonitions of the tragedy that was to strike when King was assassinated in Memphis, Tenn., 30 years ago. The story shifts from King's interior monologues to the reflections of Johnson's principal narrator, a shy, self-conscious 24-year -old acolyte of King named Matthew Bishop who, in the words of the woman he loves, talks like a thesaurus. One of Johnson's themes is Matthew's growth from a kind of intellectually precocious late adolescence to full manhood; indeed, one suspects that Matthew is modeled on Johnson's youthful self. But Johnson's narrative is aimed principally at the appearance of an entirely fictional character, Chaym Smith, a global wanderer and striver after redemption who bears an uncanny physical resemblance to King. As a result, Chaym earns a role as a stand-in for King at a time when his life was clearly in danger. But Chaym's presence gives Johnson's novel the ambiguous, Conradian eeriness of all stories about the doppelganger, the double, the mirror image and the opposite, the reminder of the invisible person who lies behind the mask. These themes are rich, and they are developed by Johnson with his usual stylishness. Chaym has lived his life shadowed by King's fame and his status as a kind of living saint. In Johnson's vision, that experience has made him both jealous and driven, admiring and vengeful. Johnson reminds us that King was a minister as well as a leader of the struggle for black rights, and "Dreamer" is full of theological reflections. The biblical story of Cain, whose sacrifice was rather inexplicably rejected by God, resounds through the novel as Chaym asks why he has been cursed even as blessings pour down on King. "That was my stuff," Chaym tells Matthew after the two of them have listened to King speak at a church. "Not things I've ever said, but stuff I've felt. Like my spirit is trapped in his, which is so much clearer and bigger and cleaner." In other words, there are numerous folds to Johnson's psychological intrigue. Chaym himself is a powerful character, eloquently irascible, morally deep. And yet "Dreamer" is not a complete success, despite the consistently high quality of Johnson's writing. In the end especially, Johnson seems to lose control of his doppelganger theme. Instead, "Dreamer" turns to a muddled theme of betrayal involving an unlikely pair of federal agents and Chaym. The betrayal seems, at least by virtue of its timing, linked to King's assassination, though this is far from clear. It is as though Johnson himself did not know quite what to do with the forces he has set into motion. His recourse to a kind of unresolved and implausible mystery leaves the reader with a sense of incompleteness, anticlimax. And while that might be an intentional reflection of the deeper incompleteness of real life, a lesson in the unresolvability of things does not seem to have been Johnson's purpose. <ANNOTATION> (STORY CAN END HERE _ OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) </ANNOTATION> The action of "Dreamers" takes place mostly in Chicago, where King, having achieved major victories in the South, has arrived to campaign against Northern forms of racial discrimination. Johnson's King is tired and tearful and assailed by doubts. He wonders in particular if he has overestimated the spiritual capacity of blacks and whites alike, whether they are capable of understanding his "deeper, esoteric message about freedom," namely that "to gain the dizzying heights of the mountaintop, the self's baggage had to be abandoned in the valley." Chaym Smith arrives at King's door in the midst of these ruminations. "He was the kind of Negro the movement had for years kept away from the world's cameras," Matthew says of Chaym's appearance: "sullen, ill-kept, the very embodiment of the blues." Chaym volunteers to be King's stand-in, a role he has been unhappily playing most of his life anyway. When King refuses, Chaym tells him, "I figure if I'm catchin' hell 'cause of you, I might's well catch it for you instead." King agrees to arrange training for the destitute Chaym so he can be part of the movement, and he assigns Matthew and Amy, the unreciprocating object of Matthew's desire, to take care of him. The story unfolds against a background of increasing urban violence and challenges to King from younger, more militant blacks within the ranks. "Dreamer" in this sense takes on a time-capsule flavor. This is sometimes contrived, for example, when Amy and Matthew find themselves berated as "house niggers" by an ex-con named Yahya Zubena who has found poetry and black power in prison. But the main character remains Chaym, whose homophonic resemblance to Cain is made explicit as Johnson returns again and again to his biblical theme. "I began to see _ as if a veil had lifted _ the tortured shadow of Cain everywhere, within me and without, his many cultural reincarnations parading through my mind like frames projected on a cyclorama," Matthew tells us. "It was said that Western man himself was Cain, cursed with the burden of restlessness and the endless quest for selfhood. Down through the centuries, his name was spelled differently in different times. Caym, Kaym, even Chaym, were etymological variations on it." So Chaym, King's double, is Cain, but he is everyman as well, within and without. Near the end, Chaym, asked by a pair of rather woodenly constructed FBI men to turn from double to double agent, disappears. Soon after, King is assassinated. Johnson seems to be saying something about the collective failure to climb to the mountaintop as well as collective responsibility for King's death. That is no doubt true, but it is also a nostrum, a commonplace sort of wisdom. And it is unmoored from the deeply personal and individual mystery that Chaym presented at the outset. PUBLICATION NOTES: 'DREAMER' A Novel By Charles Johnson 237 pages. Scribner. $23.