NEW YORK _ Eyad Ismoil, the man who drove a rental van loaded with a homemade bomb into the World Trade Center garage in 1993 and helped cause the explosion that killed six people and injured hundreds more, was sentenced on Friday to 240 years in prison. In handing down the sentence, Judge Kevin T. Duffy of U.S. District Court in Manhattan rejected Ismoil's contention that he had not received a fair trial, as well as his lawyer's argument that Ismoil was not a knowing participant in the bombing plot when he was recruited into the conspiracy by Ramzi Yousef, who was convicted along with him in November. "What you did was a sneak attack," Duffy said. "What you did was to kill innocents. What you sought to do was to kill innocents." The judge also imposed a $250,000 fine, and ordered Ismoil to pay $10 million in restitution _ "just to make sure that you never make a dime out of this," he said. During the proceeding, Ismoil, the last of six defendants convicted of carrying out the bombing plot, continued to assert his innocence. "Jail me, and you will add one number to the wrong list," he said. "But don't think that you will ever rest, because tyrants always end up in trouble." He said that the charges were false and that they would "fade like a bubble." "In this world," he said, "a fair trial is always rare." The judge dismissed his contention. "You have received an extraordinarily fair trial, something which was done not as a show trial but to give you the opportunity to put forward whatever you wanted to do," he said. Under the rules of the federal system, Ismoil will not be eligible for parole, and is likely to spend the rest of his life in prison. His sentence matches the 240-year -terms imposed on the five other men convicted in the bombing. The U.S. attorney in Manhattan, Mary Jo White, whose office prosecuted the case, said the sentence "once again sends a clear message that this country will respond to terrorist acts with the full force of the law." Ismoil did not testify in the trial, but his lawyer, Louis R. Aidala, often sought to distance his client from Yousef, portraying him as a naive 21-year -old Jordanian who came to the United States to get an education and a job, and got swept into the conspiracy. He said there was no evidence that Ismoil was a religious or political fanatic, like Yousef. Prosecutors said Ismoil was working in Texas when he was called by Yousef and asked to help in the plot. Ismoil told authorities after his arrest that he believed he was transporting boxes of soap into the World Trade Center garage as part of a business deal, the jury was told. During Friday's proceeding, Aidala again questioned whether there was sufficient evidence that Ismoil knew he was participating in a bombing. Assistant U.S. Attorney David Kelley argued that the jury had made fair conclusions from the circumstantial evidence. The judge agreed and then echoed statements that he had made in sentencing Yousef in January, when he said that the convicted terrorist had worshiped the god of "death and destruction." "You were like Ramzi Yousef because your god was evil," the judge told Ismoil on Friday. "I am not talking about an evil god; I am talking about the personification of evil."