NEW YORK _ Moe Foner sat in the glow of sunshine inside his office, where papers, posters and plaques were scattered about. He was on the phone or, more accurately, on hold, waiting for a car-service dispatcher to get back to him. A heart condition and walking pneumonia make it hard for him to get around. "I can't take public transportation," he said, his patience wearing a bit thin. "Oh, I'll do it some other time." He hung up and rooted around the papers on his desk. "You know about the rally on Saturday?" he asked, holding out a flier plucked from the pile. On it was a picture of the Rev. Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. above the words "We March to Keep His Dream Alive." Foner, 82, may not be able to do much marching these days, but he does what he can to fulfill the last half of that declaration. For decades he was second in command at 1199, the hospital workers union, witnessing a tumultuous era when it went from representing drugstore clerks and pharmacists to winning collective bargaining rights for thousands of low-paid, behind-the-scenes workers at nonprofit hospitals. In those rocky times, King was a steadfast supporter of what he called his "favorite union" and the "moral conscience of the labor movement." Today, 30 years after King was assassinated in Memphis, Tenn., people may recall what the civil-rights leader did for the cause of racial equality. But people like Foner will never forget what he did for organized labor, a struggle that King cast in terms of human rights and dignity. "Some people know very little about Dr. King," said Foner, who directs the union's Bread and Roses project, which takes culture to the work place. "King was involved with many unions. When he was shot down in Memphis, he was supporting the sanitation workers, who were on strike. But his association with us was special." When the two men met in 1959, the union was trying to organize in seven hospitals, despite the obstacles posed by reluctant managers and laws that excluded employees of nonprofit hospitals from labor laws. "They were at the bottom of the ladder," Foner recalled. "They received $26 a week and had no protection. Everybody said to us: Don't touch the hospitals. The workers won't stick together because they're poor. Even assuming you get a majority, the hospitals don't have to agree to an election. And if you go on strike, all you'll get is injunctions, jailings and fines." Although the hospital workers were receptive to the union's overtures, Foner and his colleagues decided they needed to open another front in their campaign. They suspected that organizing low-paid minority workers would not be enough to sway the boards that ran the institutions. "We had to get the public's support, so that could have a moral effect on management," he said. "You're dealing with trustees of hospitals that can call up and speak to the mayor and governor. The Who's Who of America, those people." King knew about the union, and Foner was invited to meet with him at the home of Stanley Levison, a New York businessman who was a close adviser to King. At that meeting, King offered to write a letter of support which the union widely circulated. By 1962, when the union was lobbying to amend state laws to allow collective bargaining for hospital workers, King called Gov. Nelson Rockefeller three times to urge his support. King often visited with union members and officials, and his last major speech in New York City was at a union rally the month before he was killed. In it, he boasted that he considered himself "a fellow 1199 -er." He mentioned that any talk of urban unrest and "long, hot summers," should also consider what was done during the "long, cold winters" that preceded them. He talked about how people worked full-time jobs for part-time pay. "People are always talking about menial labor," he told the audience. "But no labor is really menial unless you're not getting adequate wages." Three and a half weeks later, he was dead. The union he helped is now the city's largest, and its headquarters bears his name. Not that Foner needs any reminders. He'll be at Saturday's rally, even if walking a block leaves him short of breath. "Labor has to show it's really interested in people," he said. "There are remarkable people around. You shouldn't have to wait until they die to tell them."