From its inception, the concept of the National Museum of the American Indian, planned for the Mall in Washington, was meant to be a design apart. American Indian elders were called in for "vision sessions" to guide the architects. The chief designer, Douglas Cardinal, is of Blackfoot ancestry. And soon he began to fashion a dramatic, swooping building of rough-hewn limestone, meant to resemble cliffs carved away, with windows aligned so that at winter and summer solstices, the sun's rays would shoot in like beams to illuminate sacred objects. At the center, he planned a circular gathering spot, or potomac, for storytellers and dancers. The museum, sitting next to the Capitol, would be a symbol of forgiveness and healing, he said. But in what it called a "drastic action," the Smithsonian Institution has terminated its contract with Cardinal, a prominent 64-year -old Canadian, and with his collaborators, GBQC Architects of Philadelphia, adding a serious complication to the life of the $110 million project. The termination, first reported this week by The Washington Post, has come after a protracted period of wrangling between the architect, who considers himself a "warrior," and the museum over delays and contractual disagreements. Last year, saying he had "run out of resources" because of the extra hours he was putting in, Cardinal decided to "make a stand," as he put it, by withholding his architectural drawings, in effect holding the project hostage. Failure to deliver the working and technical drawings, as well as procedural delays between the two firms, were major reasons for the dismissal, Smithsonian officials said. "It's a step we've taken with the greatest reluctance," said David Umansky, a spokesman for the Smithsonian Institution, which had planned to break ground on the 250,000-square-foot project in the fall. "Mr. Cardinal did not live up to the contract. We came to the difficult decision that we had to move on if this building was going to open in the year 2002. We have an obligation to produce the museum with the money we have." The Smithsonian, he added, relies on congressional appropriations. "This Congress looks very carefully on how money is being spent." The museum says it plans to build Cardinal's design _ which has already passed the hurdles of approval by the federal Commission of Fine Arts and the National Capital Planning Commission _ with a successor yet to be named. "It's obviously been very painful," said the museum's director, J. Richard West, a Cheyenne. "But it is our absolute intention to build Douglas ' design, and to give him credit for it, with continued native involvement." The dismissal, however, has angered some of the American Indian elders who have taken part in the "vision sessions," among them, Lloyd Kiva New, president emeritus of the Institute of American Indian Art in Santa Fe, N.M. "The plans for this building have been drawn by a genius Native American artist who has taken the trouble to confer with Indians at every step of the way," he said. "We have a fantastic design produced by a Native American. They have no ethical right to take a man's design, whether he's Indian or Chinese. It's like letting someone finish your painting. Why don't they recognize the importance of allowing him to carry forth to see his design put into place proudly?" <ANNOTATION> (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) </ANNOTATION> Cardinal and GBQC are planning to appeal the decision, which they can do until April 27. In the meantime, the museum has hired another architectural team _ James Stewart Polshek and Partners of New York and Tobey and Davis of Reston, Va. _ to conduct a "peer review" of the project, to "see where we are," Umansky said. Polshek is currently renovating the Cooper-Hewitt Museum in New York, part of the Smithsonian, and the cultural resource center for the Indian museum, in Maryland. There has been some speculation that Polshek might take over the project, which he denied. But he said that, if he did, "we would do it to assist the federal government in a difficult situation. I do think the building will be completed in a way that will please Douglas Cardinal." Cardinal, who built a sweat lodge for himself 12 miles from the Washington Monument after moving to Washington to work on the design, is well known in Canada for infusing his buildings with his native experience. He is "metis," a French term for mixed ancestry; his mother was French, German and Mohawk, his father Blackfoot, French and Ojibwa. His best-known building is the Canadian Museum of Civilization in Hull, Quebec, a copper-domed, masklike structure across the river from Ottawa. The Indian Museum was his first major U.S. commission. The current dispute unfolded last year, when Cardinal asked the Smithsonian for additional reimbursement for work beyond the hours allotted in his contract. "They indicated to me they would make those provisions," he said. The museum advanced him $150,000, but by the end of the year, he said, he was "$300,000 in the hole." It was at that point, he said, that some of the elders advised him to hold his drawings until the problem was resolved. With a gift from an anonymous donor, he said, he continued the work after he was dismissed because he "wanted to get the project back on track." Cardinal is no stranger to controversy. In the early 1980s he made headlines in Canada when he suggested that, rather than compromise his design for the Museum of Canadian Civilization, they "bulldoze it back into a park." They did not, and it opened to great fanfare. Canadian architectural historian Trevor Boddy has written that the unusual cast of Cardinal's designs, which have generally been situated in remote places, coupled with a cultivated outsider persona, tended to keep him off the architectural A-lists. "Douglas Cardinal is a survivor," Boddy said in a telephone interview, "and he tends to be routinely underestimated. Every single project he's done has had a crisis like this. He's a very complex person." Cardinal himself, as is his wont, is trying to take the long view. "The elders have guided me," said the architect, who relies heavily on state-of-the-art computer technology to execute his voluptuous forms. "They want to be sure the whole building is done with honor, that it be a strong expression of their voice. That's the only way the building will have power."