OAKLAND, Calif. _ Joe Torre's Yankee cap was tilted back high on his forehead after Thursday night's 10 - 2 loss to the Angels in Anaheim, a dumbfounded expression overwhelming his face. With a beer in his hand, he could have been a dead ringer for Walter Matthau as the manager of the Bad News Bears. "They kicked our rears," Torre said. "We didn't help matters any." The Yankees can blame El Nino. They can blame the American League schedule. They can blame themselves. Regardless, they arrived here Friday after having lost the first two games of a season of high hopes with a toothless offensive attack and sometimes brainless play on defense. "It was an ugly game," said David Cone, who makes his first start Saturday against Oakland. "An ugly way to lose; it was embarrassing. It was the type of game that you hope could be a wake-up call. "Nonetheless, I still like this team." Derek Jeter, the shortstop, reiterated what Torre had mentioned, that the Yankees ' preparation was affected by the El Nino-driven rain last weekend in San Diego, all the hours of batting and infield practice washed away. George Steinbrenner, the principal owner, said Thursday he would request that his team open at Yankee Stadium next season. The 1997 opener was indoors, in Seattle. The Yankees went 4 - 4 on that first West Coast swing, while Baltimore _ which always opens at Camden Yards _ jumped ahead in the standing. Every trip to the West Coast in recent years has challenged the Yankees, who are 64 - 83 on this side of the country in the 1990s. Rain, West Coast, whatever, the Yankees are 0 - 2. Ramiro Mendoza, their least effective pitcher in spring training, started Friday night against the Athletics. In Thursday's defeat, there were no errors charged to the Yankees. But they played miserably, making more mistakes in one game than in the final two weeks of spring training. In the first inning, the Yankees threatened. Jeter singled and Paul O'Neill walked with one out. Bernie Williams smashed a line drive to center field, where Anaheim's Jim Edmonds stepped forward and caught the ball neck-high. Jeter, running on contact, was almost at third and was easily doubled off second base to end the inning. Dismissing the unthinkable _ that Jeter forgot the number of outs _ Torre said he thought Williams ' liner was going to land for a hit. Jeter said he did, too. "I was thinking 'score,' even though it was hit hard, and I was trying to get a good jump," Jeter said. "Edmonds caught it like he was camped under a fly ball." Anaheim scored three runs in the fourth inning against David Wells, but if the Yankee infielders had made the plays, the damage could have been limited to one run. One out into the inning, Dave Hollins hammered a solo homer. Then Tim Salmon chopped a ball into the shortstop hole, where Jeter fielded it and fired toward first. The throw skipped in front of first baseman Tino Martinez, who was unable to scoop the ball cleanly. Base hit. After Wells walked Cecil Fielder, the swift Garret Anderson slapped a half-speed grounder up the middle. The chances of an inning-ending double play were marginal, but any shot was lost when Jeter fumbled the bouncer and settled for the out at first. Instead of being out of the inning, Wells had to pitch to Phil Nevin with two runners on and two out, and he gave up a two-run double. "That was tough," Jeter said of Anderson's ball. "He hit it slow." But Wells accepted his share of the blame for the three runs; he threw a fastball with no balls and two strikes to Hollins for the home run and a hanging curveball for Nevin's double. Darryl Strawberry and Williams played alongside each other in spring training without having one ball hit equidistant between them. This occurred twice Thursday, with Strawberry catching the first ball and dropping the second, as he avoided collisions with Williams. Strawberry's second play was ruled a triple by Gary DiSarcina, setting up a two-run seventh. In the eighth, Scott Brosius, the third baseman, fielded a grounder with runners at first and third and the infield in. Brosius glanced at Carlos Garcia, the runner at third, before looking to second; Brosius had forgotten that second baseman Chuck Knoblauch would not be covering the base with the infield in. So Brosius quickly threw to first. Garcia noted Brosius ' indecision and scored. As the infielders reset for the next hitter, Brosius tapped his chest, acknowledging his mistake. Later, Strawberry overthrew a cutoff man. "Hopefully, we got all the garbage out of the way," said Torre, for one night the manager of the bad news Yankees. INSIDE PITCH Chili Davis, the designated hitter, left Thursday night's game after his third at-bat with what Joe Torre described as pain in his right foot. "His foot was a little numb," Torre said. "He had his shoe tied a little too tight."... The Yankees went 1 for 16 with runners in scoring position in the first two games... Chuck Knoblauch has reached base in six of his nine plate appearances... Orlando Hernandez, the right-hander who defected from Cuba, pitched two solid innings in a simulated game against Class A players in Tampa, Fla., allowing two infield hits.