WASHINGTON _ If Paula Jones decides to appeal the ruling throwing out her lawsuit against President Clinton, her case will go before a generally conservative circuit court in St. Louis, with a record that could cut both ways for her case. The 8th U.S. Circuit Court of Appeals, legal experts say, has not only been consistently unhelpful to Clinton, but it has also been generally hostile to complaints of sexual discrimination at the workplace like the one brought by Mrs. Jones. Mrs. Jones ' lawyers said Friday that the decision on whether to appeal the case rests solely with her and will probably be made next week. She must appeal within 30 days from Wednesday, the day when Judge Susan Webber Wright dismissed the sexual misconduct case. Ms. Wright rejected all of the claims stemming from what Mrs. Jones said was a 1991 encounter with Clinton in a Little Rock, Ark., hotel suite. The judge said that even if Mrs. Jones ' assertion that Clinton made a crude sexual advance in the suite was true, there was no evidence that it constituted sexual harassment. Lynne Bernabei, a lawyer based in Washington who specializes in sexual harassment cases, said she believed that Ms. Wright left little room for an appeal, adding that it was unlikely the ruling would be overturned. "The fact that the judge gave Paula Jones ' side so much leeway in discovery proceedings to prove their case will make it that much harder to overturn," Ms. Bernabei said. Other legal experts said the 8th Circuit judges had created a strong record in favor of defendants in employment discrimination cases, which is Clinton's role in this case. "Given that this circuit has been trying to cut back on the ease with which people can bring these suits, you could say this would be an easy case to affirm," said Roger Goldman, a law professor at St. Louis University. "But if you look at the political side of things, that would cut in the other direction. Almost all the judges who are not recused on this matter were appointed by either Bush or Reagan and to the extent that politics makes a difference, that would cut in the other direction." Goldman was referring to the fact that just three of the 10 active judges on the appeals court have been appointed by Democratic presidents, and two of the three have made it known they would not participate in any cases involving Clinton. A similar view to Goldman's was offered by Leland Ware of the same law school who has studied the appeals court's handling of summary judgments. "The 8th Circuit has been pretty rigorous about affirming summary-judgment rulings in employment discrimination cases," Ware said in an interview. "This is a defendant-friendly circuit in these kinds of cases." But he said many lawyers who practice before the 8th Circuit believed that its judges were not favorably disposed toward Clinton. "That's what makes this such an interesting call," he said. Among the cases Clinton has lost before the 8th Circuit was one in which a three-judge panel overruled Ms. Wright in January 1996. In a 2 - 1 ruling, that panel said the Jones lawsuit should not be delayed until the end of Clinton's tenure as president, and ordered the case to go forward. Its decision was upheld by a unanimous Supreme Court. In April 1997, another panel voted 2 - 1 against the White House when it said that notes taken by government lawyers of their conversations with Hillary Rodham Clinton could not be withheld from Kenneth Starr, the Whitewater independent counsel. And in a third case, in March 1996, a unanimous three-judge panel ruled in favor of Starr's expanding his investigation and took the unusual step of removing the lower-court judge from the case because he had spoken of his admiration for Mrs. Clinton and had spent a night as a guest at the Clinton White House. Judge Pasco Bowman II, who was appointed by President Ronald Reagan, was a member of all three of those panels. He was also the chief judge of the panel that overruled Ms. Wright in 1996, and that panel could inherit any appeal from Mrs. Jones. Court officials said that if for some reason the same panel did not hear the Jones case, the clerk would then be obliged to choose a new three-judge panel by lottery. In any event, the appeals court could not hear arguments in the case until next fall at the earliest, some court officials said Friday.