WASHINGTON _ Eager to shift the spotlight from Paula Jones back to the business of government, President Clinton lambasted the Republican Senate budget proposal on Friday and warned tobacco companies to go along with a proposed settlement. Tired but buoyant in his first day back at the Oval Office after 12 days in Africa, Clinton immediately assembled his economic team in the White House Rose Garden this morning and signaled an election-year showdown with congressional Republicans over the budget for the 1999 fiscal year. While clearly emboldened by a federal judge's dismissal on Wednesday of Mrs. Jones ' sexual misconduct lawsuit, the president vowed not to be distracted by such matters, saying, "I am going on with my business." Instead, Clinton castigated Senate Republicans for approving a $1.73 trillion spending plan on Thursday night that calls for modest tax cuts and excludes virtually all of the president's proposals for new spending. And he scolded members of the House for passing a six-year, $217 billion transportation bill packed with projects for almost every congressional district. "I am very concerned that the budget plan now working its way through the Senate will squeeze out critical investments in education and children," Clinton said. "I'm also determined that highway spending, though it is quite important and though our budget provides for a very impressive increase in investment in highways and mass transit, must be within the balanced budget and not crowd out critical investments in education, child care, health care or threaten our budget discipline." Sen. Trent Lott, R- Miss., the majority leader, dismissed the president's comments, asserting: "We have our priorities, he has his priorities. Education is a high priority for us." Asserting that it was Republicans, not Clinton, who sought more money for education training, Lott said, "He needs to check his figures before he starts complaining." Moving from one domestic priority to another, the president called on tobacco companies to go along with the bill that was approved this week by the Senate Commerce Committee, even though it was tougher on the companies than the proposed settlement they agreed to last summer. "I am determined to seize this historic opportunity to pass bipartisan legislation to protect our children from the dangers of tobacco," he said. "This Congress can be the Congress that saves millions of children's lives." The cigarette companies, Clinton said, needed to "reverse the record of the past, to try to put this unforgivable chapter behind them." Lott, meanwhile, said that if the tobacco settlement did not reach the Senate floor by June 1, "it's going to be pretty hard" to bring it to a vote this year. "I'm not saying it's impossible," the senator said. "But I think that the best time to do it would be before we go out for the Memorial Day recess." Clinton was unusually jaunty at his White House homecoming event. Trying to put the best face on figures showing a slight rise in unemployment, which were made public shortly before his Rose Garden appearance, he said, "While there will be ups and downs, our economy continues to be one of the strongest in history." <ANNOTATION> (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) </ANNOTATION> White House officials said Friday's appearance was the prelude to a number of events next week _ on issues ranging from Social Security to crime to school construction _ to showcase the president's domestic agenda and turn the focus from allegations about sex and cover-up at the White House. "The American people want us to use this sunlit moment not to sit back and enjoy, but to act," Clinton said firmly. "We were hired by the American people to act." Questioned about Monica Lewinsky, the former White House intern accused of having a relationship with Clinton, he said: "I am not going to comment on that. I am going to try to do what the Supreme Court said I should do, which is not to be in any way deterred by this." The president was in such high spirits that he teased Vice President Al Gore, who turned 50 while Clinton was in Africa. "I hope all of you noticed the increased gravity and maturity of his aura," Clinton said. "I personally am greatly relieved. Not long before he turned 50, as I told him when I called him, an elderly lady came up to me and said, 'I think you and that young man are doing such a good job.' And it's nice to have a middle-aged team now at the White House." Soon after the event, the president took an early slide and went golfing with his wife's brothers, Hugh and Tony Rodham.