Although the TV-watching public has long been familiar with shows based on high-quality books, few readers have looked to television to produce good written works. Peter Kaufman is trying to change that. Kaufman, president of the privately held TV Books LLC, thinks that "much of the finest intellectual property in the world is being developed for television." And his four-year -old company in New York publishes books based on programming made for networks like PBS, A&AMP;E and the History Channel and written by those intimately involved in the productions. Consider "Reagan," a four-and-a-half-hour documentary that was broadcast recently on public television. Produced as part of the award-winning series "The American Experience" by WGBH in Boston, the program was a result of several years of research and study, but only a small percentage of the material made it into the final documentary. "It seemed a shame to not use everything we had gathered, but that is what happens in this business," said Margaret Drain, executive producer of "The American Experience." Enter Kaufman and his proposal for a book based on that documentary and on others. A resulting deal calls for TV Books to publish six books based on programs in the series over the next two years. The first is "Reagan: An American Story," which was written by Adriana Bosch, a producer of the documentary, and will arrive in bookstores in April. "The decision made sense on a lot of levels," Ms. Drain said, "but mainly because it is a way for us to expand our brand." Kaufman would not disclose financial details of the deal. TV Books has published 11 books so far, and Kaufman said he expected the company to have sales of $2.5 million this year and $5 million in 1999. Kaufman expects to publish 25 more titles this year. Top-quality documentaries can cost more than $500,000 for a single hour, and a majority of the interviews, archival photographs and scholarly research never make it past the cutting room. For instance, only about 3 percent of the taped interviews made it on the air in the Reagan documentary. For producers and directors, a companion book has become a natural outlet for the unused material and another source of revenue. And because they draw on material already being produced, these types of books can have lower development and marketing costs. "I think it is a viable business model," said Michael Coffey, managing editor of Publishers Weekly. "Long-form TV cannot cover all the bases, and books can serve to answer questions raised in the show." Coffey ought to know: He is the editor of "The Irish in America," a book published by Hyperion, a unit of Walt Disney Co., that served as a companion volume to the PBS television program of the same title, which was a collaboration between WGBH and Disney. <ANNOTATION> (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) </ANNOTATION> While generations of movies and television shows have had book tie-ins and hundreds of books have been made into feature films and television movies, TV Books is thought to be the first publisher that started as an independent company focusing solely on making books from television and movies. And in yet another example of the ever-expanding search for synergy in the world of publishing, a majority stake in TV Books was acquired in December by Broadway Video Inc., the film and TV company owned by Lorne Michaels, the executive producer of "Saturday Night Live." TV Books also signed a distribution deal with HarperCollins, owned by News Corp., which has significant television interests. "The biggest influence in book sales today is clearly television and films," Coffey said. If a book is mentioned on "The Oprah Winfrey Show" or tied to a movie, it can "catch fire," he said. Of course, not all books with a television connection do well, but it certainly does not hurt to have exposure in the mass media. The editors, designers and marketers at TV Books work closely with the writers and producers of the documentaries to re-create the visual experience of the program while greatly expanding on its themes. The danger remains that if a television show is not successful, then the books can languish at the store. There are drawbacks to working with authors who are immersed in television or film projects. They tend not to have time to concentrate on the books until after completing work on the film. For a tiny publishing house, TV Books has attracted important authors and tackled hard-hitting topics. These include Russian history ("Russia's War: Blood Upon the Snow" by Richard Overy, based on a 10-hour documentary); the Irish Republican Army ("Behind the Mask: The IRA and Sinn Fein" by Peter Taylor) and Arab-Israeli relations ("Israel and the Arabs: The 50 Years' War" by Ahron Bregman and Jihan El-Tahri). James Billington, the librarian of Congress and a noted expert on Russia, is writing a companion book to his three-hour public television series, "The Face of Russia." Jessica Yu, who won a 1997 Academy Award for her documentary "Breathing Lessons: The Life and Work of Mark O'Brien," signed a deal to write a book to go with a Home Box Office documentary about a New York mental hospital. The book and the film are scheduled to have their debuts next spring. Still, not all the offerings by TV Books are serious public affairs volumes. The first of its books to go into a fourth printing is called "TV Sets: Fantasy Blueprints of Classic TV Homes," a collection of guides to the houses of such famous television families as the Bradys, the Cleavers and the Munsters.