Once upon a time, before the Internet had pictures and was all the rage, Quincy Jones, the music impresario, sat with Bill Gates, the computer magnate, at a technology conference, talking about the future. The year was 1992, and the conversation was a melding of the two titans' respective passions: the preservation of musical cultures and the nascent online universe that would become cyberspace. It took six years to realize a complete fusion of the vision that emerged that night. On Wednesday, Jones will introduce Qradio, a venture that marries the Internet to his advocacy of the rich, varied and largely unknown music of developing nations. "Web radio," a technology that transmits audio programming to Internet-connected personal computers, offers the potential to reach a wide audience at a fraction of the cost of traditional broadcasting. "It's a different sort of landscape, a 21st-century language," Jones said of the Internet. But while his site is devoted to music, unlike broadcast radio, it is not limited to sound. Rather, it is a multimedia product of which actual radio is only a part. Though it is being formally introduced this week, Qradio began in February with an initial focus on South Africa. It offers a data base of South African musicians, including biographies, discographies and sample clips, a multimedia history of musical evolution in the region and continuous feeds of three of South African Broadcasting Corp.'s 16 radio stations. Qradio, which was started with $5 million in private investments, plans to sell advertising, but it hopes to derive revenue from the sale of CDs and audio tapes marketed by means of online music samples. Jones and his partners in the venture say they hope eventually to broaden the site to embrace music from other parts of Africa, as well as from the Americas. Ultimately, it could serve as a medium for breeding new species of music, but for now, Jones suggests that the goal is to build bridges between cultures and technological classes. "Here we are, entering the next century," he said. "That number with three zeroes behind it is very heavy. It's ironic _ here we are dealing with the Internet and some of these people in South Africa don't have electricity." Adam Clayton Powell III, a lifelong friend and former employee of Jones, said the seed that germinated into Qradio was a 1991 trip that the two of them took to South Africa just as that nation's legacy of apartheid was collapsing. At the time, Powell said, the two men discussed the feasibility of a cable channel to promote the various indigenous musical cultures of the region, but the costs for such a venture were prohibitive. Even then, Powell said, the notion of using online technologies as a delivery mechanism piqued Jones ' interest. "We have got to come back," to South Africa, Powell, now the vice president for technology and programs of the Freedom Forum in Arlington, Va., recalls his friend saying. It would take the development of the World Wide Web and the technology known as streaming audio before the possibility of online radio transmission would be realized. But the technology alone cannot ensure that anyone will be listening, and industry analysts question whether a medium born in the 1920s will ever find an acceptable fit in the medium of the millennium. "To put radio on the Internet is not what it's all about," said Alan Brody, an independent media analyst in Scarsdale, N.Y. "It's like using TV to broadcast shipbuilding information. It's a cute idea, but that's not where the future is. The future is in personalizing what we hear on the radio." Powell disagreed. Now that virtually all new personal computers are equipped with audio capability, more people than ever will use the Web as a platform for radio-like programming. "Radio is the most ubiquitous medium we have," Powell said. "It's a form familiar to us as a species. We have a long tradition of oral history, and this fits that tradition." <ANNOTATION> (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) </ANNOTATION> What is more, Qradio starts at a time when music is among the few real success stories in the online marketing efforts lumped together under the term electronic commerce. At-Plan, a marketing research firm, says its latest data show that CDs and tapes are the fifth-most-popular product sold on the Web, bought by 1.3 million people in the last quarter of 1997 and that more than 12 million people visit music-oriented Web sites in a typical 30-day period. The question with Qradio, as it is with many new online ventures, is whether enough visitors will frequent and shop at a niche Web site to make it financially viable. Distinguishing oneself in new media, experts in online broadcasting say, demands a delicate balancing act _ a product that is narrowly focused enough that an audience cannot get it elsewhere yet of broad enough appeal to support advertising and direct online sales. Many other players in the medium are embracing a more horizontal strategy. The print publishing group Imagine Media of Brisbane, Calif., which specializes in computer-oriented magazines, last week started a new Internet service called Imagine Radio, a group of 20 original radio stations created just for the Web. Audio Net, a Dallas -based company that has been in the streaming audio business for two and a half years, offers 260 radio and television stations from around the country, plus some 400 special events each day. "When you're in your car you've got 30 radio stations," said Audio Net's president, Mark Cuban. "On TV, there are 20 to 100 stations. On the Net, you have millions. That's why the economics of the stand-alone radio doesn't work. It's expensive to be successful. It's really easy to get in the door. It's difficult to make money." Vern Fotheringham, a founding partner of Qradio, said: "The more people who denigrate Internet opportunities, the better I like it. It means there are fewer people out there trying to build fallow content. We're about marrying the capture of content while everyone is looking at it as a substandard, living today but prospering in the future. But after 50 years in the music business, Jones says that what is most important is encouraging the development of a medium that speaks to people across cultures and economic levels. "It's very important that the urban voice gets in there," he said. "You know _ a PC in every pot." WHERE TO GO: QRADIO http://www.qradio.net IMAGINE RADIO http://www.imagineradio.com AUDIONET http://www.audionet.com