NEW YORK _ The prices of Treasury securities were slightly lower on Tuesday in quiet trading, as some investors sold Treasuries to make room for new supplies from issuers like the South Korean government and Federal Loan Home Mortgage Corp., known as Freddie Mac. The price of the 30-year Treasury bond declined 9/32 to a price of 104, and its yield, which moves in the opposite direction, rose to 5.84 percent, from 5.82 percent on Monday. In its first international bond sale, Korea began selling $3 billion of global bonds in a move that could have wide implications for the country's financial institutions and corporations hoping to tap the global debt market. The sale could also serve as an indicator of investors' appetite for the debt of other Asian nations hurt by the region's financial crisis. In the first of two parts, the government is selling $1 billion in five-year notes with an estimated yield of about 8.99 percent, or 350 basis points more than a comparable Treasury, and $2 billion of 10-year notes at an estimated 9.14 percent, or 362.5 basis points over Treasury. A basis point is one hundredth of a percentage point. Though the actual pricing will not occur until Wednesday, market participants said there was strong demand for the bonds. Meanwhile, in another big sale, Freddie Mac priced $5 billion of a 10-year note through underwriters Goldman, Sachs &AMP; Co., Merrill Lynch &AMP; Co. and Salomon Smith Barney, at a price to yield 5.849 percent. Like the South Korean issue, it appears to have been a success. The offering comes just one week after a $4-billion sale by the Federal National Mortgage Association, or Fannie Mae. With yields on Treasury securities at low levels, strong demand for these corporate and global issues came as no surprise. Such issues are attractive to those who do not expect further large gains in U.S. government securities without further proof that the economy is slowing enough to keep inflation contained. In the Treasury market, traders said they expected continued sluggishness for the next few days, as the market may have risen too much last week. The Treasury itself was an active buyer Tuesday, purchasing $1.4 billion of coupon issues with maturities from April 1998 to March 1999, lending some support to prices. Bill Gamba, senior vice president and manager of bond trading at Cowen &AMP; Co., was struck by the low volume. "If the market were trading on Saturday and Sunday I couldn't imagine it being slower than this," he said. "There were many players absent." Because the bond market will be closed for half of the session on Thursday and then closed for Good Friday, many players have already given up for the week. Gamba said he did not expect that the Treasury's $8-billion auction on Wednesday of 30-year inflation-indexed bonds would hold any surprises for the market.