CHICAGO _ "I'm in the middle of everything," said Eppie Lederer. She was speaking of Chicago, the hometown she loves, but she could have been pinpointing her own spot on the cultural map. As Ann Landers, Eppie Lederer has been the arbiter of Main Street American mores since 1955, dishing out advice seven days a week in a column that the Guinness Book of World Records says is the most widely syndicated in the world, with 90 million readers in some 1,200 newspapers. She receives 2,000 letters a day. Eppie _ no one calls her anything else _ isn't slowing down as she approaches 80 (on the Fourth of July). I'd come to her palatial apartment above Lake Michigan to learn how she and her readers had survived the Clinton sex scandals. "I have the pulse of the nation, so to speak," she said. Dressed in red _ and speaking in the firecracker Chicago newsroom rhythms of "The Front Page" _ she might BE the pulse of the nation. A Democrat, she has kept her readers' trust by never endorsing politicians _ or products or fads. While Ronald Reagan and Jimmy Carter appointed her to boards and Bill Clinton invited her to stay in the Lincoln Bedroom ("No money connected _ I gave him nothing!"), Eppie will vouch for the private life of just one of the many presidents she has known: "Truman is the one I would bet on _ that he was absolutely, totally faithful to Bess." As for the Clinton accusations and revelations: "I didn't know what I'd get from readers. Would they be outraged? Would there be a lot of anti- Clinton stuff? I was surprised _ there was so little negative mail and such an outpouring of support. I have concluded this is a very popular president. They're saying it's not our business, and we don't care... This is not just sophisticated New York and California. This is Middle America. My column appears in a lot of small-town papers _ Des Moines ; Muskegon ; Tyler, Texas." Paula Jones? "The readers knew who was prompting her, who gave her the makeover. They don't buy it. I say hurray for the American public!" Monica Lewinsky? "They feel sorry for her. They feel she's a little long in the tooth to be chasing celebrities. She isn't a teen-ager." Kenneth Starr? "He failed. He should go to Pepperdine already." Linda Tripp? "She is the current villainess, I tell you. I've had absolutely no positive mail about Linda Tripp." But doesn't the public's refusal to condemn Clinton signal some kind of moral collapse? Eppie, whose own marriage ended in divorce in 1975, said: "People are much more willing to forgive now. They are more permissive. They are more realistic. This is the way life is. Not all husbands are faithful... I've been doing this 43 years. The country has been going in this direction for some time. I don't think it's just the Clintons. We're getting to be more forgiving as a people. It's a good thing." Eppie also dismissed the notion that the nation's children had been scarred by the nonstop talk of oral sex and adultery: "It's awfully hard to shock a kid above 8 years of age in this country unless they're living in a glass bubble. The children know a heck of a lot more than their parents think they do. I knew more than my parents thought I knew." Eppie attributes today's kids' knowledge about sex to TV. She grew up in pre-TV Sioux City, Iowa, but her father, Abe Friedman, owned theaters, among them a burlesque house. "That's where my sister" _ her twin, Pauline, who writes the rival "Dear Abby" column _ "and I got our sex education. We were 15 years old and the girls in the chorus were 16 years old. We hung out backstage because we liked them. We talked to them a lot, and we heard PLENTY." In other words, I asked, you don't find the Clinton scandals particularly momentous? Eppie abruptly got up, went to an adjoining room and came back with a big scrapbook. In it were photos of her visit with American soldiers in a Saigon hospital in 1967. "War is what's important," she said, turning the pages. "This is what counts _ not this other kind of stuff about Linda Tripp. Who cares about Linda Tripp? The American people are pretty solid, they're pretty savvy, and they know what's important. That's why they're not screaming and yelling about Bill Clinton and some of these females." Then Eppie put down the scrapbook to offer some advice. "This," she said, "is where you should end your column."