&UR; (Terry PACE is a staff writer for the Florence (Ala.) Times Daily. This story was distributed by The N.Y. Times News Service.) &LR; FLORENCE, Ala. _ From the area's earliest movie houses to the development of the region's first modern library, the legacy established by Florence businessman Louis Rosenbaum has enhanced quality of life here for three generations. As the century draws to a close, the Rosenbaum family hopes to transform one of their long-treasured possessions _ the Usonian-style family home designed by world-renowned architect Frank Lloyd Wright _ into a vital cultural resource for generations to come. "What I really want is to give the house away so that it can be restored and maintained," said Mildred Rosenbaum, who has lived in the house since its construction began in 1939. "We don't have the funds needed to restore the house, so we'd like to see it fully restored and turned into a house museum that people can fully enjoy." Plans for the transfer of the historic home are being coordinated by her sons, Alvin Rosenbaum, a published author, designer, regional planner and founding president of the National Center for Heritage Development. "This house is a very important example of American architecture," maintains Rosenbaum, whose comprehensive book, "Usonia _ Frank Lloyd Wright's Design for America," was published in 1993. "It needs to be saved and taken care of and made available to the public." Mildred Rosenbaum and her husband Stanley (who died in 1983) were young newlyweds when revolutionary modern architect Wright _ whose fame and notoriety were already reaching international proportions _ agreed to design their modest new home at 601 Riverview Dr. in Florence. In his book, Alvin Rosenbaum described Wright's unique Usonian concept as "... a place where design commingled with nature, expanding the idea of architecture to include a civilization, a utopian ideal that integrated spiritual harmony and material prosperity across a seamless, unspoiled landscape." As he developed the Rosenbaums ' future home, Wright envisioned the structure as a prototype for his daring new approach to residential design for middle-class Americans. "The Rosenbaum house is the purest example of the Usonian," Cambridge University scholar and architect John Sargeant proclaimed in "Frank Lloyd Wright's Usonian Houses," a book published in 1976. "It incorporates detailing improvements and combines all the standard elements in a mature and spatially varied interior." The house has been owned by the Rosenbaum family since its construction, and Wright has been quoted by Frank Lloyd Wright Foundation archivist Bruce Brooks Pfeiffer as calling the couple "ideal clients" who "lived appropriately and beautifully in their home." In a rare move, Wright himself designed an addition to the house in 1945 when their family of four sons had outgrown the space. Today the Rosenbaum house enjoys the distinction of being the only Wright -designed structure in Alabama and the only pre-World War II Wright house that is still occupied by its original owner. "We showed the house to people from the very beginning, because people just asked out of curiosity," Mildred Rosenbaum recalled. "It was unlike anything this area had ever seen. They couldn't imagine what was behind that blank wall in front. They either rang the bell or knocked on the door and asked, 'May we come in and see?' We allowed them to for years. Then, after Stanley passed away, I just didn't feel up to it." Since 1991 _ after an open house drew an overwhelming single-afternoon crowd of 800 people _ Mildred Rosenbaum has served as a live-in curator and tale-spinning tour guide, offering fascinating, firsthand remembrances of the house, her family and Wright himself. Over the past seven years, the Rosenbaum House has been visited by close to 5,000 tourists representing 48 states and 20 foreign countries. "These people came to see the Rosenbaum House," Alvin Rosenbaum noted, "but they also came to be a part of the W.C. Handy Music Festival, or to see Wilson Dam, to fish or swim, to stay overnight or to spend part of their family vacation here in the Shoals. Those things have a tremendous economic impact on an area _ much more than they're usually given credit for." With that in mind, the family hopes to see the proposed Rosenbaum house museum developed in conjunction with a broad-based community partnership focusing on the benefits of cultural tourism. Supporters say the restoration of the Rosenbaum house will be accompanied by the development of educational and cultural-outreach programs. In January, Mildred and Alvin Rosenbaum discussed the future of the house with representatives of the Florence -based Frank Lloyd Wright Rosenbaum House Foundation as well as local leaders in business, education, tourism, historic preservation and the arts. Since that time, Alvin Rosenbaum has been engaged in assembling a planning team and soliciting support for the project from potential funding sources across the country. "Initially, I've had substantial expressions of interest and some very good responses," he said. "However, I think that there is a truism that national foundations and funding sources are only available to the extent that there is local commitment. These days, public-sector support is not as important as individual people. And the issue is not just financial. It involves partnerships and cooperative relationships with other organizations, so that we're not duplicating efforts that are already being done." Alvin Rosenbaum believes his family's cherished home _ which celebrates its landmark 60th anniversary next year _ can be developed as "the hub for a region-wide heritage initiative" that encompasses all of the cultural attractions in the Shoals _ from the Helen Keller birthplace in Tuscumbia to the Renaissance Tower in Florence as well as the various gospel sings, barbecue suppers and bass-fishing tournaments that define the area's local color. "Just doing the project isn't enough," Rosenbaum added. "You have to do it in such a way that it's sustainable and part of an overall plan for the entire area. I just talked to my 7-year -old on the phone. When he's 67, the house needs to be here, pristine, telling the story that's part of his life." For his recent return to the Shoals, Rosenbaum was joined by J. Jackson Walter, who served as president of the National Trust for Historic Preservation for seven years. Walter, who Rosenbaum insists "wrote the book on how historic preservation is now practiced in the United States," is helping the family organize a steering committee for the Campaign to Save the Rosenbaum House. "I came predisposed to the proposition that the house should be preserved," admitted Walter, who now heads the Waterford Foundation in historic Waterford, Va., a town that has been designated as a National Historic Landmark. "Now that I've been here, what's interesting to me is the actual context _ the way this house and this family fit into the history of this area. There's so much here _ from the TVA story to the music industry _ and it's a very interesting mix. I suspect that the restoration of this house will have a catalytic effect on the understanding of the Muscle Shoals area and how it presents itself to the larger public." On a personal level, Alvin Rosenbaum wants the restoration of the house to continue a long-standing family tradition of "building the character of this community." His grandfather, Louis Rosenbaum, introduced movies to the Shoals and helped support institutions ranging from churches to libraries. His father, Stanley Rosenbaum, retired from the movie-theater business and launched an even more fulfilling career as a professor of English literature at the University of North Alabama. "My father was an educator, and as anyone who's visited here can tell you, books practically hold the house up," Rosenbaum observed. "This house was full of college students and other friends talking about ideas, enjoying an intellectual atmosphere and participating in a certain quality that this house eked out of people. That, to me, is the most important part of the legacy." Rosenbaum also considers the restoration project a tribute to the spirit and dedication of his mother, who turned 80 last year and continues to conduct public tours of the house _ by appointment only _ on a regular basis. Just last month, the Alabama Bureau of Tourism and Travel named Mildred Rosenbaum among 12 of "Alabama's Unforgettable Faces" _ an honor citing individuals who "make a very positive impression" on visitors to the state. "Certainly the house without Mimi is not the same thing as the house with her," Alvin Rosenbaum admits. "She will be involved in every aspect of this so long as she is able to be involved _ which I would predict is to her dying day. I hope that's not for a long time."