Strong thunderstorms will be common from eastern Texas and Oklahoma to the lower Mississippi Valley as a cold front moves slowly across the region. Heavy rain in slow-moving storms will produce local flooding. One band of thunderstorms is expected to weaken Monday morning as it moves eastward into Louisiana. Later Monday, a new area of potent thunderstorms will erupt over eastern Texas as a jet stream disturbance passes overhead. By late Monday, vigorous thunderstorms, some with damaging wind and hail, will be over the southern Mississippi Valley. Meanwhile, lighter showers will spread across the Tennessee Valley and southern Appalachians. Farther north, clouds will cover most of the Plains states. Rain will be steadiest and heaviest near the southern Plains, while spotty light rain is expected over central sections. A bit of freezing drizzle is possible over parts of the Missouri River Valley. A few flurries will whiten the northern Dakotas. The Northeast will be mainly sunny but chilly as sprawling high pressure moves slowly southeast from Ontario. Clouds will begin to increase later Monday from the southern Great Lakes to the Middle Atlantic States. Patchy mountain snow and valley showers will accompany a strengthening disturbance over the interior Northwest. Overnight, several inches of snow will accumulate over parts of the northern Rockies as colder air arrives from the north. The Southwest will be mainly dry and mild. A few clouds and scattered sprinkles will precede the arrival of cooler air over California and Nevada. FOCUS: MARCH WINDS March is known for its wind. The large temperature contrasts, which provide energy for storms linger during the third month. Though the deepest chill over the Arctic is beginning to wane, burgeoning warmth from the tropics regenerates temperature differences across the nation. While windswept snow plagued parts of the interior Northeast Friday, temperatures surged to near 60 in the Middle Atlantic States. On stormless days, the sun's energy stirs up the lower atmosphere, blending winds near the ground with stonger winds from above, thereby spawning the famous breezes of March.