WASHINGTON _ When the dust settled this week after the House passed its mammoth $217 billion, six-year highway bill, most New York lawmakers walked away ecstatic about the millions they managed to reap for their state. The bill has 47 percent more for New York state than did the last highway bill, passed in 1991, including $652.2 million from a $9 billion provision for special projects. One clear reason for the increase is simple politics: The House Transportation Committee includes five New York members, four of them Republicans. The sums could change once members of the House and Senate meet to work out the differences in their two bills, including the fate of all the special projects, but legislators are optimistic. "New York fared a heck of a lot better than we had any reason to expect," said Rep. Jerrold Nadler, D- New York City. Most of the millions in special projects would go toward much-needed asphalt-and-steel staples, like highway construction, bridges, parking lots and bus stations, but the bill also includes $40 million for a new Staten Island ferry in New York City. Legislation of such mammoth proportions always covers a few unusual projects. For example, the Calspan University of Buffalo Research Center, a nonprofit organization run jointly with the State University at Buffalo, N.Y., would receive $12 million to help create the Center for Transportation Injury Research. The center, according to a recent news release, will work to "find ways to get the right type of emergency response to an accident scene more quickly." The cries of a small band of vocal opponents of big spending did little to temper the House's overall enthusiasm for the bill, which passed 337 - 80. New York City would see dozens of improvements. Houston Street, for one, would be given wider sidewalks and improved stoplights at a cost of $2 million. The 79th Street traffic circle off the West Side Highway would be rebuilt for $9 million, and the Frederick Douglass Circle at the northwest corner of Central Park would be improved, for $14.65 million. Nadler arranged for $19 million for barge companies carrying rail freight cars across the harbor between Brooklyn and New Jersey. Nadler also had $24 million included for a study of the cost of digging a tunnel to replace the elevated section of the Gowanus Expressway, which residents call an eyesore. Members of Congress "know what their districts need as well as or better than anyone else," Nadler said. "When members go home and they say I got this or that, they better be reasonable projects or they will be criticized back home for it." <ANNOTATION> (STORY CAN END HERE _ OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) </ANNOTATION> Overall, New York did well. In addition to the money for special projects, the state would receive $7.34 billion for mass transit and $10.57 billion for highways. But it was the special projects that most interested members of Congress. Rep. Sherwood Boehlert, R- Utica, N.Y., who is the fourth- ranking member of the House Transportation Committee, secured the most money in the New York delegation, bringing back $65 million for new roads, bridges and an assortment of other projects. "I take great pride that I come out No. 1," Boehlert said. "It's not just a back-of-the-envelope exercise in the chairman's office in the wee hours of the evening. This was two years in the making." The lone New York congressman to oppose the measure, Rep. John LaFalce, D- Buffalo, N.Y., said he voted against it to protest its conspicuous largesse. Critics said the bill threatened to bust the federal budget, which was finally balanced last year, and cut into important domestic programs. House and Senate negotiators have yet to decide where to make the cuts, although the bill's drafters and supporters say that gas taxes will pay for the special projects. "We experience the gain now, but we don't decide who experiences the pain later," LaFalce said. "That's not prudent. That's not fiscal discipline." The biggest items usually involve roads and bridges. Buffalo, for example, would get $16 million for a new outer harbor bridge, courtesy of Rep. Jack Quinn, R- Buffalo, a member of the Transportation Committee. The Grand Concourse in the Bronx, in New York City, would get a redesigned look to "enhance traffic flow" for another $16 million. In Boehlert's upstate New York district, the Utica to Rome expressway in Oneida County would be improved for $20 million. Universities even got on the list. Fordham would get $2 million for a large parking lot that is near bus and rail stations. And there is $12 million for the State University at Buffalo's little-known National Center for Earthquake Engineering Research. The center plans to use the money to conduct research to reduce the "seismic vulnerability of the national highway system."