The rapper Ice Cube makes his directorial debut with "The Players Club," a hearty throwback to the formula behind '70s blaxploitation films: sex, violence, cash, trash and flash. Set in what is euphemistically called "a gentleman's club," it constructs a 100 percent predictable soap opera around clean-cut Diana Armstrong (LisaRaye), who is a college student and single mom. "All this dancin', and finals was just around the corner!" she complains, articulating the film's central dilemma: Diana is wholesome and nice, but she has to strut her stuff at the club for fiscal reasons. She uses Diamond as her nom de strip. In a film that sees its biggest moral distinction between dancing at the club and moonlighting at bachelor parties, song titles on the soundtrack include "Shake Watcha Mama Gave Ya," "Show Me da Money," "Whores in the House," "We Be Clubbin"' and "You Know I'm a Ho." And yet for all its leering this is as soapy a film as "Soul Food," defending the empowering benefits of exotic dancing yet worrying about good girls gone wrong. In a spirit of exploitation that invokes the heyday of Pam Grier, it also manages to turn Diamond into a pistol-packin' mama and work in a catfight or two. Ice Cube, who plays a minor heavy and flaunts his trademark scowl, also throws in some broad humor, as when Diamond's nemesis (Chrystale Wilson) shows up at a bachelor party full of white policemen and starts spanking them in honor of Rodney King. Campy moments and a luridly colorful look (with cinematography by Malik Sayeed) may give this no-flair, no-frills B movie a healthy video afterlife some day. There's something to be said for a cautionary tale in which one chastened ex-stripper winds up selling shoes. PRODUCTION NOTES: 'THE PLAYERS CLUB' Written and directed by Ice Cube ; director of photography, Malik Sayeed ; edited by Suzanne Hines ; music by Hidden Faces ; production designer, Dina Lipton ; produced by Carl Craig and Patricia Charbonnet ; released by New Line Cinema. Running time: 103 minutes. This film is rated R (under 17 requires accompanying parent or adult guardian). It includes much profanity, partial nudity and suggestive situations. With: Bernie Mac (Dollar Bill), Monica Calhoun (Ebony), Jamie Foxx (Blue), A.J. Johnson (L'il Man), Ice Cube (Reggie), Alex Thomas (Clyde), Faizon Love (Peters), Charles Murphy (Brooklyn), Chrystale Wilson (Ronnie), Tracy Jones (Tina), Terence Howard (K.C.), Larry McCoy (St. Louis), Ronn Riser (Professor Mills), Dick Anthony Williams (Mr. Armstrong), Badja Djola (the Doctor), Tiny Lister (XL) and LisaRaye (Diamond).