After months in overdrive, the great American jobs engine seems suddenly to be idling. In March, for the first time in more than two years, the economy added no new jobs, the Labor Department reported on Friday. Payrolls edged down by 36,000 jobs, and the unemployment rate, which had been at a 24-year low, edged up to 4.7 percent from 4.6 percent. The Labor Department also reported that February's job gains were being revised downward. Even though most economists were expecting job growth to moderate, the different job market picture conveyed by Friday's report caught them by surprise. The department warned, however, that the report was somewhat suspect. Last month's dip in jobs _ the first since January 1996, when snowstorms shut down businesses in the Northeast _ may reflect the abnormal weather patterns of the last few months more than real changes in the labor market. Unseasonable cold during the survey period last month, following unusually warm temperatures in January and February, may have skewed the seasonal adjustments the Labor Department makes to raw job-survey figures. Katherine Abraham, commissioner of the Bureau of Labor Statistics, said, "There's a lot in this report that you have to discount." The jobs report nonetheless warmed the hearts of those investors who welcome any sign that the labor market is cooling, particularly those who trade bonds. The economy had been adding jobs at a pace of more than 300,000 a month, fanning fears that employers were running out of workers and leading some to declare that the Federal Reserve might move to raise interest rates to brake growth. Now, such possibilities seem more remote and stock and bond prices responded accordingly. Stocks finished mostly higher on Friday, while a rally in bonds pushed the yield on the benchmark 30-year Treasury down to 5.79 percent, the lowest since Feb. 17. "It's further reason for the Fed to do what it does best: absolutely nothing," said David Wyss, chief economist at Standard &AMP; Poor's DRI. On the other hand, few believe that the job market is shrinking as abruptly as the Labor Department's data might suggest. "This is nothing to worry about," said Bruce Steinberg, chief economist at Merrill Lynch. Just as El Nino and unseasonably warm temperatures in January and February exaggerated the job market's strength in the winter, the unseasonable cold in some of March is probably exaggerating the weakness just reported. "Large numbers of construction workers normally are laid off during the November -to- February period," Dr. Abraham said. "During the recent winter, however, fewer workers than normal were laid off. With so many construction jobs already filled, early- spring hiring fell short of its usual pace." Job growth averaged 205,000 a month this past quarter. That is not as strong as the 356,000 rate of the last quarter of 1997, but it is robust by any measure. "We're still probably growing above trend," said President Clinton's chief economist, Janet L. Yellen. Like most private forecasters, she said, the Council of Economic Advisers expects job growth to be more moderate than last year. "As we go toward the end of the year we'll be looking at numbers more in the hundreds," she said. "We've gotten a little spoiled." A pace of 125,000 new jobs or so a month would keep the unemployment rate about where it is now. The Labor Department reported that in March, after seasonal adjustment, 88,000 jobs were lost in construction and 43,000 in restaurants. But some businesses tell a different story. Mitchell Fromstein, head of Manpower Inc., the largest temporary-help service, confirmed this. "The demand for people is still very high at every level," he said. "We don't sense any downturn in our business." Similarly, home building and office construction are booming. "We've had more and more reports from builders that their big problem is finding qualified labor," said Michael Carliner at the National Association of Home Builders. "We have no inclination that there's been a decline in employment." And while McDonald's recently announced that it would invest in labor-saving technology and Pepsico is spinning off its restaurant chains, help-wanted signs are still much in evidence at drive-in franchise locations around the country. Indeed, the National Federation of Independent Business, which issued its monthly survey on Friday, reports that the No. 1 problem facing small businesses is still finding qualified workers. Twenty-eight percent of the respondents, a near-record, said they had job openings they could not fill. The Labor Department reported strong job gains in computer and data processing, engineering and management services and financial services, which are benefiting from a the boom in home buying and stock investing. Manufacturing hiring remained surprisingly strong, suggesting that the financial crisis in Asia had not yet made its full impact felt. Manufacturing employment, vulnerable to weakness in Asian markets and more intense competition from lower-price Asian imports, actually rose by 3,000 last month. Total hours worked declined by seven-tenths of 1 percent from February. But for the quarter, hours are still 4.9 percent above last quarter's level. That suggests that economic growth this quarter has been fairly solid. (In the fall quarter, hours grew 4.6 percent, while the gross domestic product rose 3.7 percent.) Despite the rise in unemployment, there were still classic signs of tightness in the labor market. Long-term unemployment _ defined as joblessness among those who are out of work for 27 weeks or longer _ was at its lowest since economic expansion turned upward in 1991. And the average duration of unemployment declined to 6.8 weeks from 7.2. Hourly earnings rose 4 cents last month, to $12.63. But the previous month's increase, originally reported as 8 cents, was revised down to 6 cents. "Wages aren't accelerating as fast as was feared," Wyss said.