NEW ORLEANS _ In a town famous for its flamboyance, Susan Spicer is the city's stealth chef. Unlike Emeril Legasse or Justin Wilson, she speaks softly, has no desire to build a restaurant empire and serves neither Cajun nor Creole food. But if she is quiet and self-deprecating, the food at her restaurant, Bayona, shines, and she is widely regarded as one of the cooking luminaries of New Orleans, and of the nation as well, as she is routinely cited in surveys of America's best chefs. Her intimate restaurant in the French Quarter is packed nightly with locals as well as tourists who appreciate her uncluttered cooking, which relies on the goodness of the ingredients and her captivating approach. Her food reflects her wide-ranging interests: She has lived in France and Holland, and has traveled throughout most of the Mediterranean and the United States. From her mother, who is Danish, she learned variety. "She was as likely to serve fried chicken as curry," Ms. Spicer said. But some of Ms. Spicer's food also mirrors a Louisiana sensibility. She uses oysters to stuff roasted quail, and encrusts rabbit with pecans and serves it with a sauce made from Cajun tasso ham. Her Thai spicy shrimp, on the other hand, is brilliantly seasoned and authentically Thai, with beautifully balanced flavors. The presentations are simple and straightforward. No towers of food and other show-off architecture. Success came quickly to Ms. Spicer when she opened her own restaurant in 1990, but it was not before years of casting about for a career. Ms. Spicer, 45, considers herself a late bloomer. She claims to have failed at everything else she tried. "I was a cocktail waitress, and I was fired, and I was a bad secretary," she said, a small smile playing around her mouth. "So I could be considered a change-of-career person if I had ever had a career. I was a child of the 60s, and I was restless. I started cooking at 26, but I was always looking for a creative outlet. Nothing came easy." She began her culinary career in 1979 by apprenticing herself to a French chef in New Orleans. Then she spent four months working at all the stations in a Parisian restaurant kitchen, knowing that when she returned to New Orleans her boss expected her to become the chef of a restaurant he was opening. She said she didn't feel she was qualified, but the decision was out of her hands. "Being a chef when I felt I wasn't ready was pretty stressful," she said. "Everyone I hired I thought knew more than I did. I was really kind of afraid a lot of the time. So I left and went back to Europe and worked here and there." She returned to New Orleans a year later and, in 1986, was the opening chef at the Bistro in the Maison de Ville hotel, where she stayed until Bayona became a reality. It was an immediate success, turning a profit within six months. Even though Bayona has a national reputation among the cognoscenti, and even though she feels "pretty confident" about what she is doing, Ms. Spicer thinks she has a long way to go. "Bayona is still evolving," she said, on a recent afternoon as she cooked some of her favorite dishes in the cooking-school kitchen of her shop, which she recently opened. "You have to stay fresh. I want to keep it that way. I don't think I have enough energy to inject into five different projects." She is determined to keep growing as a cook. "One of the things I'm good at is putting flavors together," she said. "I have good instincts about food and wine, probably from being adventurous at a very young age. I can sit in my office and put a menu together. But in terms of technique, I would like to be more confident." Ms. Spicer, who has dark blond hair and intense pale blue eyes, describes herself as shy, but she does not go unnoticed: people always remember her because of the band she wears across her forehead when she cooks. Except, of course, in the presence of a reporter, when the headband moves to the back of her hair, and any leftover hippie traits are disguised. Those who have seen her conduct a cooking class describe her as lively and funny, sharing intimate secrets of her private life, talking about her younger boyfriend, for example, who is also the manager of her shop. She describes this mingling of her personal and professional lives as "a pretty dangerous thing to do," adding in an offhanded manner that she is "past the point of worrying about getting married." Ms. Spicer came to cooking in spite of her father and because of her mother. "My dad had really high hopes for me scholastically," she said. "I did well in school. I skipped a grade when I was a kid, and he wanted me to be some sort of engineer, something less earthy than a cook. I wanted to go to the Culinary Institute of America, but he didn't want to pay for it." Despite the lack of the architectural plates that are so in vogue today, despite the fact that the food is neither Cajun nor Creole and that the chef does not have a television cooking series, not even a cookbook, Ms. Spicer's patrons have come to trust her. "I think we keep it interesting enough without intimidating people," she said. Ms. Spicer's understated style is apparent, too, in the look of her new shop called Spice Inc. : clean and spare. The shop is taking off, even though its location makes Ms. Spicer an urban pioneer. Spice Inc. opened late last year in a warehouse district on its way to gentrification. The grungy exterior of the historic Cotton Mill Building provides no clue to her airy shop on the first floor. Sunlight streams in through floor-to-ceiling windows. The loft-like decor _ exposed metal pipes, light woods, a painted cement floor _ provides the background for enticing displays of prepared foods like sesame-crusted tuna, Thai green curry chicken and Shorty's macaroni and cheese as well as an ample selection of fruits, vegetables and cheeses. The shop makes its own European-style bread; it is the first to do so in New Orleans, Ms. Spicer said. Spice could not look more different from Bayona, which is in the heart of the French Quarter in a 200-year -old Creole cottage with French jalousie doors. The restaurant has three intimate dining rooms, with ceiling fans, terra-cotta walls, crisp white linens and lighting that makes everyone look good. A glassed-in garden room looks out on an incredibly romantic brick-walled garden. Yet, for all its charm, it is as understated as the owner. "I'm not looking to provoke," Ms. Spicer said. "I'm not an envelope-pusher. I'm glad there are people who do that, but essentially I just want it to taste good." <ANNOTATION> (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) </ANNOTATION> Recipes adapted from Susan Spicer, Bayona GRILLED DUCK BREAST WITH PEPPER JELLY GLAZE Time: 30 minutes 8 boneless duck breasts, about 6 ounces each, skin on, trimmed of fat Coarse salt 1 teaspoon freshly ground black pepper 2 teaspoons chopped fresh thyme 2 teaspoons chopped fresh rosemary For the pepper jelly glaze 2 tablespoons chopped shallots } cup sherry vinegar 3 cups well-seasoned chicken or beef stock 3 tablespoons hot pepper jelly 2 tablespoons unsalted butter Salt and freshly ground black pepper to taste 1 jalapeno, seeded and finely minced, optional. 1. Wash and dry duck breasts. Mix together salt, pepper, thyme and rosemary. Sprinkle the mixture over the skin side of the breasts, and refrigerate for several hours or let stand about { hour before cooking. 2. Make the glaze: combine the shallots, vinegar and stock in a small pot and bring to a boil. Reduce heat, and simmer until liquid is reduced to about a cup. Whisk in the pepper jelly, and then the butter. Season to taste with salt and pepper. Add the jalapeno, if desired. Add more vinegar if sauce is too sweet. 3. Grill or saute skin-side down for about 6 minutes ; then turn and cook about 2 minutes longer, depending on how rare you want the breasts. Remove from heat; let stand about 2 minutes ; then, slice on the diagonal into 5 or 6 pieces and arrange on plate, skin side up. Spoon glaze over the top. Yield: 8 servings. SMOTHERED GREENS Time: 20 minutes 2 tablespoons unsalted butter 2 tablespoons olive oil 2 medium onions, chopped 12 cups assorted greens _ like mustard, broccoli rape, collard, kale, turnip _ stemmed, washed and chopped Chicken stock, if needed 4 teaspoons cider vinegar Salt and freshly ground black pepper Hot sauce, optional. 1. In a large nonstick saute pan, melt the butter with the oil. Saute onion for about 5 minutes, without coloring. 2. Stir in the assorted greens, and cook over medium-high heat, until the vegetables are wilted and tender, about 8 to 10 minutes. If mixture becomes dry, add a little chicken stock. 3. Stir in the vinegar, and season with salt and pepper and hot sauce, if desired. Yield: 4 servings. SWEET POTATO PUREE Time: 1 hour 5 minutes 2 pounds sweet potatoes or yams 1{ tablespoons unsalted butter 1{ tablespoons molasses or honey [ teaspoon grated nutmeg. 1. Preheat oven to 375 degrees. Scrub potatoes, and bake on lowest rack for 45 minutes to 1 hour, until potatoes are soft. 2. Cool slightly, remove skins and mash with butter, molasses and nutmeg. Heat through, on top of the stove or in a microwave oven, and serve. Yield: 4 servings. STRAWBERRIES WITH PINK PEPPERCORN SAUCE Time: 20 minutes \ cup sugar 2 tablespoons Cognac 1 tablespoon balsamic vinegar 1 teaspoon concentrated pomegranate juice or molasses 1 teaspoon pink peppercorns, lightly crushed 1 pint strawberries, washed and stemmed (1 cup diced, the rest sliced). 1. Place the sugar in a small pot with 1 tablespoon water. Stir to dissolve. Bring to a boil over medium-high heat, and simmer until a deep caramel color. Watch carefully because mixture can burn easily. 2. Remove from heat, and carefully pour in the Cognac and vinegar. Put back on low heat and swirl mixture to dissolve caramel. Remove from heat and stir in the pomegranate juice or the molasses, the peppercorns and the diced strawberries, and cook over low heat for one minute. The sauce will be thick and syrupy. 3. Cool, and carefully stir in remaining strawberries. Serve over vanilla ice cream, mascarpone or panna cotta. Yield: 4 servings.