For almost 20 years, since its debut in 1979, Bob Edwards has presided over the National Public Radio news magazine "Morning Edition." But from the start, the soothing, avuncular tone that is Edwards ' trademark raised certain questions. "Isn't that man dangerous?" a 10-year -old in the school car pool I was driving asked in 1980. I couldn't imagine what could be less dangerous. "What are you talking about?" I asked. "It's early in the morning," she said. "There are all these people driving around. He's going to make them all go back to sleep." Like a number of other high-profile NPR news-magazine hosts or news readers, Edwards conveys a distinct sense of disengagement with the subjects he is presenting: the latest Serbian atrocities or an odd little cow-up-a-tree human-interest story from Iowa. It's a distance that translates into a sense of superiority over whatever is being talked about. It's shared by the "All Things Considered" hosts, Robert Siegel and Linda Wertheimer, and the hourly news reader Ann Taylor as, year by year, day by day, they wend their way through the vagaries of events and time. What comes across is a sense of boredom with the world. With Edwards, boredom might be the product. He is not remotely offensive; he is always patient. He sounds as if he has all the time in the world. Pleasantly, like a neighbor who drops in for coffee every morning at precisely the same time, Edwards conveys the feeling that nothing can really surprise him. What could be more reassuring? On and on he drones, with little broadcasting pronunciation tics to keep your ear attuned to the blanket of syllables issuing from his mouth: a singsongy rhythm, pauses that break the rhythm, a warm, soft entrance into the next clause that restores the continuity. It begins to seem certain that nothing will ever change. Not only will the sun rise tomorrow, Edwards ' performance says, it will rise tomorrow in exactly the same manner in which it rose today. Presidents, senators, representatives, sports heroes, film stars, flood victims: Edwards, his tone says, was here before they got here, and he'll be here when they are gone. Set forth in a less kindly manner, the same story is told by Siegel, Ms. Wertheimer and Ms. Taylor. Edwards ' patience is replaced by impatience. The world will never change, these people are telling you, but, maddeningly, the world keeps pretending that it does change. The bored, contemptuous, irritated assumption seems to be that while, say, Bill Clinton is transitory, Siegel or Ms. Wertheimer _ and, by implication, the faithful NPR listener _ are permanent. This is often communicated on "All Things Considered" before and after any particular information or opinion. The White House correspondent, Mara Liasson, or the legal affairs correspondent, Nina Totenberg, may offer detailed, nuanced and, most importantly, involved reports. But with Siegel or Ms. Wertheimer sweeping up, it is all translated into attitude. One can get the feeling that the bumper stickers on their cars would read "I'd Rather Be Attending an Embassy Reception," if the very idea of a bumper sticker wasn't impossibly vulgar. Ms. Wertheimer and the afternoon news reader, Ms. Taylor, share the remarkable ability to look down their noses while talking through them. Speaking from NPR's Washington headquarters, they can make the rest of the country, even New York _ so ethnic, so exotic with local custom _ seem like a tired but mildly diverting play staged for their laconic amusement. Siegel works differently. His speech is clipped, with words suddenly hurried or inexplicably dragged out, mumbled or swallowed: aural hooks, the equivalent of serifs on a type face, except that serifs don't call attention to themselves. There's a lot of Dick Cavett in Siegel's interviewing style. He's terribly earnest, while at the same time suggesting he's not very interested. He's like a well-prepared lawyer who seems never to ask a question to which he doesn't already know the answer. It's that denial of the chance of surprise that is so deadening. There is nothing new under the sun, least of all anything we might want to raise our voices over. Perhaps the most powerful moment of news reporting I ever experienced took place in 1978, on the night the news of the mass suicides and murders at Jonestown began to break. On television, on the evening network news show, the anchor summed up the facts as they were known, looked at the papers on his desk and, lowering his voice, spoke of "this awful story." He broke the code of news broadcasting, the unspoken message that all things under the sun take place within the limits of what is already known, and it was shocking. That code is a lot of what NPR is selling. The antiphon to the cool school of NPR broadcasting is provided by Terry Gross of "Fresh Air," the daily one-hour interview and arts program that originates from public radio station WHYY in Philadelphia. Ms. Gross, 47, is the host and principal interviewer; speaking on the phone last week, she guessed that since the program began more than 20 years ago, she has done 9,000 or 10,000 interviews. Yet each one seems to begin a tale from the beginning. Though the show is conducted mostly by remote hookups, the atmosphere is invariably intimate and open. The feeling is that anything can happen; anything might be said. Ms. Gross is characteristically eager, but not naive. You hear enthusiasm in her voice, but also experience and skepticism. More often than not, people are on her show to sell their books, but she is doing the show to bring them, and what they are writing about, to life. She knows how to let people talk; she's not afraid of silences, or above a noisy "Blech!" when she's repulsed by a creepy story. She's dogged; she can give the impression that she will wait around all day if that's what it takes to get someone to stop faking. In a recent interview with Eddie Miller, author of the unreadably preening true-crime novel "Another Day in Paradise" _ this is all true, one is supposed to believe, they just had to change the names _ Miller answered every other question with some variation of "That's in the book." He spoke in a slow, gravelly, leering voice; as an armed robber, he said, he had lived "the American dream in person." He met Ms. Gross ' questions with heavy sighs, as if to say: "Where's this chick been all her life? Man, do I have to explain everything? It's in the book!" Asked about how he felt while committing robbery, Miller began to laugh, with a smug insistence that he knew things Ms. Gross would never know. "What's so funny?" Ms. Gross asked in her high, pleasant, disarming voice _ a voice that in an instant had turned into a knife _ and finally Miller started talking. "Fresh Air" started as a local show in Philadelphia in 1975, Ms. Gross explained when we talked last week. It went national in 1985, daily in 1987. Just like "American Bandstand," I said, thinking of Dick Clark's 1950s rock 'n' roll dance party, perhaps Philadelphia's other signal contribution to American broadcasting. "Yeah!" Ms. Gross said.