HOLLYWOOD _ Ask the top talent agents in Hollywood or studio executives or producers for the name of the biggest star in town. It's not Tom Cruise or Mel Gibson or Harrison Ford. The answer is one word: Leo. Leonardo DiCaprio _ the few who know him and the many who pretend to know him call the actor Leo _ is not only Hollywood's hottest star as a result of "Titanic" and "The Man in the Iron Mask" but, by all accounts, the biggest star to have emerged in years. "I've never seen a frenzy like this," said Sherry Lansing, chairwoman of the Paramount Motion Picture Group, which jointly financed "Titanic" with 20th Century Fox. "I don't know what to relate it to _ the Beatles, Elvis, Frank Sinatra in his heyday. The frenzy is not just about his looks but his talent." The blond 23-year -old actor, whose androgynous good looks make him seem almost like a teen-ager (which is part of his appeal to young girls), is, of course, the co-star with Kate Winslet of "Titanic," in which he plays the artist-lover of an unhappy rich woman about the doomed vessel. The film has grossed more than $1 billion worldwide, a box-office record, and was in a dead heat last weekend to remain in the No. 1 spot with "The Man in the Iron Mask," a remake by Randall Wallace of the Dumas classic, which stars DiCaprio in the dual role of Louis XIV and his brother, Philippe. Both films grossed an estimated $17.5 million. DiCaprio's rapid rise to stardom is underscored by his financial demands. He signed on to "Titanic" for a reported $2.5 million. He earned about $6 million for "The Man in the Iron Mask," made by United Artists, a division of MGM. His demands for a studio film are now in the $20 million range, placing him on par with Cruise, Ford and a handful of others. Yet what seems highly unusual about DiCaprio, in contrast with stars like Cruise or Gibson, is that, by all accounts, he is not especially comfortable with, and actually dislikes, his image as a movie idol, not only in the United States but abroad. Several filmmakers who know him said that the star already felt trapped by his romantic image among teen-agers and viewed himself as a serious actor who sought roles with other talented actors and A-list directors. (His only other forthcoming role is in a new Woody Allen project, called "Celebrity," to be released later this year.) What's also unusual about DiCaprio is that he does not fall within the tradition of rugged classic stars like Clark Gable, or romantic heroes like Cary Grant, or archetypal American figures like James Stewart, or even character stars like Spencer Tracy, James Cagney or Humphrey Bogart. Instead, DiCaprio seems to most resemble Montgomery Clift and James Dean, whose performances were marked by brooding and sensitive roles that especially appealed to teen-agers. DiCaprio's longevity as a star remains, of course, unknown. In present-day Hollywood, actors are heralded as stars, mostly by the publicity machine, but then fade. Last year Vanity Fair hailed Matthew McConaughey as the next Paul Newman. But a series of disappointing films have dimmed McConaughey's stardom. Matt Damon of "Good Will Hunting" is getting a similar star treatment now. Yet DiCaprio is seen, somehow, differently. Since his teen-age years, he has been a sought-after actor in Hollywood and viewed as a performer with an unusually broad acting range. "People are confusing his looks with his talent," remarked Lindsay Doran, president of United Artists. "Look at the Beatles _ it was the power of the music that created the emotion that got all mixed up with how adorable those guys were." DiCaprio earned an Academy Award nomination for best supporting actor at 19 for his portrayal of a mentally impaired youngster in "What's Eating Gilbert Grape." He gained further attention in "This Boy's Life" (1993), a harrowing drama in which he played opposite Ellen Barkin and Robert De Niro as the son of an abusive stepfather. His breakthrough role, though, was in Baz Luhrmann's MTV -style "William Shakespeare's 'Romeo and Juliet'" in 1996, with Claire Danes, an unexpected hit among teen-age girls that made studios aware of DiCaprio's appeal. "With Leonardo DiCaprio it's charisma, pure and simple, and if you can define what charisma is, tell me and I'll bottle it," said Laura Ziskin, president of Fox 2000, a division of 20th Century Fox. "He's got an amazing gift as an actor, but so do a lot of people. He's got something else, and only a handful of people have that." DiCaprio, who began making television commercials at 14 and then appeared on the television series "Growing Pains," is almost reclusive and declines most interviews. He appeared on NBC's "Today" show last week to promote "The Man in the Iron Mask" and said, "I'm a lucky guy, I'm getting tons more opportunities." The fact that he was not nominated for an Academy Award _ in contrast with Ms. Winslet _ was, he said, "a non-issue." Rick Yorn, his manager at the firm Addis-Wechsler &AMP; Associates, was unavailable. Filmmakers who have worked with DiCaprio have said that his presence on screen sets him apart from other actors. Wallace, who adapted and directed "The Man in the Iron Mask," said: "Most actors are like most people _ they're actually scared to play roles in which they portray openness and heroism because they have an inherent and usually unspoken fear that to attempt such a role would be to reveal their own inherent shallowness and cowardice. So actors hide behind quirkiness and cynicism. No one would accuse Leo of that. Cynicism is the last thing that he's about." Tom Rothman, president of production at 20th Century Fox, put in another way: "What you have in Leo is a gigantic star _ and remember, he's a star worldwide _ who's somehow able to open himself up on screen and let you in emotionally... You feel what his character in 'Titanic' feels. The same with Romeo. It's not just a question of good looks; there are plenty of good-looking guys out there. On the screen he's emotionally accessible. How many actors are like that?"