The Smithsonian Institution in Washington has shut down three divisions producing books, records, and videos, most notably the Smithsonian Collection of Recordings, which has issued widely praised albums of jazz and popular music. Officials said on Tuesday that they hoped to continue offering some of the recordings but the announcement of the cutbacks, particularly of the recordings, were met with widespread alarm and disappointment by scholars and collectors. In a memo dated March 31, Smithsonian undersecretary Constance Berry Newman announced the closing of the three divisions and the loss of 10 jobs at the institution, which has 6,500 employees overall. The memo's contents were reported on Tuesday by The Washington Post. Most significant was the closing of the Smithsonian Collection of Recordings, which has been an invaluable resource for scholars and the public for a quarter-century. Best known for recordings like the "Collection of Classic Jazz," which has sold more than a million copies since 1973, the Smithsonian recordings have received two Grammy awards and been nominated for 11 others. "I think it's unwise, and it surprised me quite a bit," Dan Morgenstern, director of the Institute of Jazz Studies at Rutgers University, said of the decision. "They had a certain cachet, and did some very good things. I can't believe the Smithsonian, which is the closest thing we have in this country to a national museum, is so poverty stricken they can't keep this going." But officials at the Smithsonian said the closing of the recording division reflected problems with its distribution system, which relies largely on direct mail, more than discontent with its mission. They said they hoped to offer some recordings in the future if the operation could be made economically feasible. "What we eliminated was the current method for distributing these recordings," said Robert Schelin, acting managing director of Smithsonian Press/Smithsonian Productions, which oversees the three divisions that were cut. "The curators and historians will still be in place. What we're really re-evaluating is the mechanisms for producing and distributing this kind of work." Also closed were Smithsonian Books, which specialized in a small number of mass-market books sold through direct mail, and a small video production division. The decision leaves intact the Smithsonian Institution Press, the main book publishing arm of the museum. Smithsonian Books, which was closed, had 15 titles, mostly glossy illustrated books. Smithsonian Institution Press has 800 scholarly and general interest titles, which are primarily sold at bookstores and museums rather than through direct mail. All three of the divisions that are closing are part of Smithsonian Press/Smithsonian Productions, which has lost $10.8 million over the last two years and is expecting a $2-million loss this year, officials said. The total Smithsonian budget is $552 million. The move does not entirely end the Smithsonian's role in the recording industry. Folkways Recordings, which has distributed folk and archival recordings for more than a decade as part of the Smithsonian, remains. Officials left open the possibility that the jazz, country and pop recordings done by the Smithsonian Collection of Recordings could continue, perhaps under the imprint of the Folkways label. In her memo, Ms. Newman said an analysis would continue of the continuing operations to "explore ways in which the dissemination of scholarly works through a recordings and a production program can continue in some form." A Smithsonian Institution spokesman, Linda St. Thomas said on Tuesday that the Smithsonian would like to find a way to continue some of the recording functions, but that it was too early to tell in what form and to what degree that might play out. Officials said the decisions were made against the backdrop both of the financial needs of the Smithsonian and the changes in the marketplace that have buffeted many direct-mail operations. "My understanding is that as the direct-mail environment has eroded overall for all businesses, those projects became more and more difficult to sustain," said Peter Cannell, director of the Smithsonian Institution Press, the surviving publishing arm. He said employees at the Smithsonian viewed the cutbacks with conflicting feelings. "It's a decision that is in some ways sorry to see," he said. "But on the other hand, any business or institution has to be able to change with the times, and that's what we're doing here."