MOSCOW _ In a meeting that was as much political theater as substance, President Boris Yeltsin summoned his opponents to the Kremlin Tuesday in an attempt to show that he has a steady grip on the reins of power and to drum up support for his new prime minister. The much ballyhooed political round table took place in the ornate St. Catherine Hall. The president held center stage while Sergei Kiriyenko, the youthful aide that Yeltsin picked to be prime minister, sat by his side. The television cameras captured Yeltsin as he served notice to his critics that he had no intention of abandoning Kiriyenko. After projecting an image of strength, Yeltsin portrayed himself as a reasonable leader who would try to work with the Communist -dominated lower house of parliament. But the meeting itself was something less than definitive. After the two-hour session ended, the back-room negotiating over the Kiriyenko nomination went on. "I think it was a purely cosmetic event," said Yevgeny Volk, the director of the Moscow office of the Heritage Foundation. "What we are talking about is bargaining. In tactical terms, Yeltsin conducted a round table so that the Communists and nationals could say their pressure on the government had been answered." Volk, however, expressed the dominant view in Moscow that Yeltsin would ultimately succeed in winning parliamentary approval of Kiriyenko's appointment. Indeed, the key question increasingly appears to be not whether Kiriyenko will be approved but what the cost will be in terms of symbolic or substantive concessions by Yeltsin in new appointments or programs. To be sure, Yeltsin was not the only one striking poses. Gennadi Zyuganov, the communist leader, declared after the meeting that the Communists would not back Kiriyenko's appointment when his nomination comes before Parliament on Friday. But that does not mean that the Communists are determined to block the nomination indefinitely. Many political analysts believe that the Communists are determined to appear resolute before a national day of protest scheduled for Thursday. And Zyuganov was careful not to exclude the possibility that the Communists might eventually acquiesce in the nomination. Vladimir Zhirinovsky, the nationalist leader who is best known for his clownish antics, said he would back Kiriyenko only on the condition that he could pick some of the members of Yeltsin's new government. Alexander Shokhin, the parliamentary leader of Our Home Is Russia, the political party founded by ousted prime minister Viktor Chernomyrdin, also suggested his party should influence the composition of Yeltsin's new team. Grigory Yavlinsky of the liberal Yablocko Party was the most adamant in the opposition to Kiriyenko. He appears to be calculating that the influence of his Yablocko Party will increase if he remains unambiguously in the opposition or if Kiriyenko falls by the wayside. The Parliament's first vote on the Kiriyenko nomination is expected on Friday. Even if the Parliament rebuffs Yeltsin, the president has indicated he will press again for the Parliament's approval and he has considerable leverage. <ANNOTATION> (STORY CAN END HERE. OPTIONAL MATERIAL FOLLOWS) </ANNOTATION> If the Parliament rejects Yeltsin's choice for prime minister three times, the president can disband the parliament and call for new parliamentary elections. Many parliamentary deputies are loath to compete in such early elections and prefer to hold on their posts and privileges as long as possible. But Tuesday's meeting was designed to avoid a confrontation. During the session, Yeltsin said he had considered several other choices, including Yegor Stroyev, the head of the upper house of parliament and Moscow major Yuri Luzhkov, before settling on the 35-year -old Kiriyenko. Yeltsin praised Kiriyenko's professionalism and said that his new government could include candidates from opposing factions. Kiriyenko is to propose a list over the next week of officials that would serve in the new government. Yeltsin grandly declared that 1998 should be "a year without confrontation," overlooking the fact that he had not bothered to consult the parliament of most of his own government before picking Kiriyenko and ordering his surprise government shake-up" "I will not veto your decisions and you should abstain from bans," Yeltsin said. "Let's try to get along this way."