LOS ANGELES _ The entertainment industry thrives on a thinly disguised hierarchy of exclusivity. Even well-known producers and directors fight ferociously _ through their agents or assistants, of course _ for tickets to major events. Still, "Seinfeld," NBC's enormously successful sitcom and cultural icon, has trumped the crowd. The taping of the final segment of the final episode of the show, which is shutting down after nine years, is shrouded in dense secrecy and is proving all but impossible to get into. "I've gotten 89 million calls about it," said Alan Horn, the chairman of Castle Rock Entertainment, the company that produces "Seinfeld." "Shameless? Yes, people are shameless about trying to get in. But it's just a family affair, you know, people who've been connected to the show and families." Horn said he was taking his wife, his two children and another relative. About 250 people have been invited to watch the final taping on Wednesday, all of them connected in some way to the show or its stars: Jerry Seinfeld, Julia Louis-Dreyfus, Jason Alexander and Michael Richards. "It's closed," said Elizabeth Clark, the spokeswoman for Castle Rock. "Nobody outside the immediate show is going to be allowed in." Adding to the aura of secrecy, no scripts are being circulated. Indeed, those who have received scripts have had to sign confidentiality agreements, Horn said. No one involved would even discuss the contents of the episode, which is to be broadcast on May 14. The show is expected to attract one of the largest television audiences ever. As a result, NBC has reportedly sold advertising at $2 million for a 30-second spot; that is roughly four times the show's usual rate. Security will be extremely tight at Wednesday's taping, and already the producers are bracing for a heavy cordon of television cameras and news crews at the gates of the studio, CBS Studio Center in Studio City. Since the last "Seinfeld" episode will be an hour long (one of the few bits of information the people involved would disclose), it is being taped over several nights, not the one night typical for most shows. The script has been written by Larry David, who created the show with Jerry Seinfeld but left two years ago to work on movies and other projects. The episode will feature the regular cast along with several guest stars who have appeared in previous episodes. But it is not even clear exactly what the audience will see on Wednesday evening. There have been rumors that the concluding moments of the episode will be taped at another time. There is one rumor that the select audience will be shown a tape of a decoy ending, a fake intended to throw snoops off the track in case anyone at the event discloses the story line. (A whole fake script was circulated on the Internet by an unknown author.) The television series, which, in a reflection of the times proudly proclaims that it is a show about nothing, is enormously popular and a huge source of profits for NBC and Castle Rock. Even though no new episodes will be produced after Wednesday, "Seinfeld" is already proving a great success in syndication. The show, at 9 p.m. on Thursdays, has been a mainstay of one of the most popular nights on network television. Already there are concerns about whether NBC will be able to replace "Seinfeld" with anything that could draw as large, young and affluent an audience. But for one night at least, that will be a distant thought. Wednesday night will be given to entertainment and the bragging rights of those who will be able to claim they saw it firsthand.