A pithy two-hour excerpt of "Everything I Know" greets visitors to "The Utopian Impulse," a new exhibition about Fuller's visionary ideas and their influence on the Bay Area, opening Friday at the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art. "We couldn't find a player that could handle 42 hours of video," said Jennifer Dunlop Fletcher, the exhibition's curator. On the monitor behind her, the video played and Fuller said, "My information stimulus from the brain is always terminal, so all my inputs are finite."

Fuller's loquaciousness, more even than the geodesic domes that made him famous, was his primary stock in trade. "He spent a lot more time talking than doing," Fletcher said. Fuller died in 1983.

Even the things he created were most compelling for the ways he described them. For instance, his three-wheel automobile — represented in the exhibition by a large photograph overlaid with patent drawings — was a commercial flop after a prototype crashed at the 1933 Chicago World's Fair.

Yet his underlying notion of doing "the most with the least" — streamlining the car like an airplane for maximum efficiency — was decades ahead of Ford's steel-trap thinking, an example of anticipatory design (synthesizing art, science, engineering and economics) if ever there was one. By the 1960s, Fuller had found a mass audience, not within the auto industry but within the emerging counterculture, for which the idea of doing less with more was apposite. He gave lectures of epic length,  inspiring renegades half his age to act on his beliefs.

%13129%

The Whole Earth Catalog, first published in Menlo Park in 1968, was dedicated to him. "Fuller's lectures have a raga quality of rich, nonlinear, endless improvisation," read an introductory tribute by Stewart Brand, the publisher. From Brand's LSD-enhanced perspective, Fuller preached self-sufficiency, which Brand sought to realize via his catalog — a mail-order sourcebook for everything from hunting boots to CB radios. "I was persuaded by Fuller that tools and techniques were the essence of human progress," he wrote in an email, "whereas politics often was a complete distraction."

Fletcher has included several vintage Whole Earth Catalogs in the exhibit, as well as one product that Fuller consulted on personally: the Oval Intention geodesic tent, first produced in Berkeley in the '70s by the North Face. "When you talk about the efficiency of being able to assemble a geodesic dome with one hand behind your back," said Fletcher, "that's the North Face tent." And unlike the trussed domes Fuller built, it didn't break or leak.

After Fuller died, at 87, enthusiasm for his teachings cooled outside a small circle of  acolytes, who sought, through seminars and books, to turn the freest of free thinkers into the high priest of a cult. Only in the past decade have his ideas re-emerged.

%related%

Thom Mayne's 2007 San Francisco Federal Building, for example, incorporates a "living skin" of automatically adjusting windows  said to be influenced by Fuller. Represented by a 2007 study model in the exhibition, Mayne's building embodies the practical application of one of Fuller's most outlandish ideas: to enclose Midtown Manhattan under a dome that would moderate temperature swings to foster a "Garden of Eden interior."

Yet the most fertile 21st-century application of Fuller's ideas has been in realms he could scarcely have imagined. "Fuller had the notion that if you just had access to information, all the world's problems would be solved," Fletcher said. The Internet has finally made that possible, albeit not for everyone.

The One Laptop per Child initiative, a nonprofit organization that gives cheap, durable tablets called XO Laptops to children, is arguably the most ambitious attempt to address the global imbalance in information access. So far, 2.6 million XOs have been distributed in countries from Uruguay to Rwanda. Yves Béhar, the San Francisco-based designer responsible for the XO, did not create it in accordance with the geometry of the universe, but he considers himself indebted to Fuller. "I think the notion of the utopian design project is alive in my generation of designers, and Buckminster Fuller has had a lot to do with it," he said. "The confidence to challenge the status quo has come from pioneers such as Bucky Fuller."

If Fuller's ideas serve technology well, technology has returned the favor. His resurgent influence can partly be attributed to nostalgia for midcentury design and '60s counterculture. But the Web has proved more decisive in his renewed popularity, allowing him to speak freely  again, unconstrained by disciples.

Despite attempts by the Buckminster Fuller Institute to control video of Fuller's lectures, most of "Everything I Know" has been anonymously uploaded to YouTube.

Jonathon Keats is most recently the author of "Virtual Words" (Oxford University Press). You can reach him at jonathon_keats@yahoo.com.

This article also appears in the Bay Area edition of The New York Times.