Adachi said Thursday he would appeal a San Francisco Superior Court judge's ruling barring his office from representing Luc in the case. On Thursday morning, Judge Lucy McCabe ruled that Adachi's office had a conflict of interest, because it had represented Luc's brother, Brian Luc, in a recent DUI and firearms case for which he is still on probation.

Brian Luc was arrested Sunday, the same day as his brother, on suspicion of narcotics possession, being a felon in possession of ammunition and violation of his probation. He may be called as a witness in his brother's case, according to prosecutors Sharon Woo and Linda Allen. They argued that because the public defender's office had previously represented Brian Luc, it had access to privileged information about him.

"Our obligation ... is to ensure Mr. Luc has conflict-free counsel, and in this case that simply can't be the public defender," Woo said.

McCabe ruled in favor of the prosecution, citing the fact that the two defendants are brothers and lived at the same address.

"We were disappointed by the judge's decision," Adachi said outside the courtroom. "She didn't follow the law."

%related%

Adachi said the judge should have given Binh Luc the opportunity to waive his right to conflict-free representation. He said he plans to file a motion with the State Court of Appeals next week challenging McCabe's ruling.

Adachi had argued in court that once Brian Luc was sentenced to probation six months ago, he was no longer considered a client of his office.

"I've talked to every public defender in the Bay Area and they have the same policy," Adachi said after the judge issued her ruling. "Why? Because if we were disqualified in every case where we had formally represented somebody and that person was on probation, we'd have no clients to represent," he said.

McCabe appointed Mark Goldrosen, a private attorney, to represent Luc, who had been scheduled to be arraigned Thursday. Goldrosen requested time to review the criminal complaint, and the arraignment was rescheduled for April 5.

"Everybody here is interested in the best interests of the client," he said. "And whether it's myself or the public defender who is representing him, that's our ultimate goal is to protect our client and represent his interests to the best ability that we have."

Binh Luc told Goldrosen during a short recess that he still wants the public defender to represent him.

Omid Talai, a spokesman for the district attorney's office, expects that the appellate court will uphold McCabe's ruling.

"The law supports the vital proposition that each criminal defendant is entitled to conflict-free representation," he said.

Prosecutors have charged Binh Luc, a 35-year-old San Francisco resident, with five counts of murder with special circumstances that he committed multiple murders, committed them in the commission of robbery and burglary, that he used a blunt instrument to kill the victims, and that he was lying in wait before killing one of the victims, 32-year-old Vincent Lei.

The medical examiner's office on Monday identified the two men killed as Lei and 65-year-old Hua Shun Lei. The women were identified as Wan Yi Xu, 62; Chia Huei Chu, 30; and Ying Xue Lei, 37.

A family member called 911 after entering the house, located near City College of San Francisco, at about 7:45 a.m. Friday and finding three of the bodies. Police responded and found two more victims.

The special-circumstance charges in the case make Luc eligible for the death penalty, but prosecutors have said District Attorney George Gascón will likely not seek capital punishment.

The Bay City News Service contributed reporting.