But Brian Luc's criminal record may be complicating efforts by the San Francisco Public Defender's office to represent his brother, Binh Thai Luc, who was arrested Sunday in connection with the grisly killings of three women and two men in a house near City College of San Francisco.

Binh Thai Luc told a court Wednesday he wants to be represented by a public defender. But the public defender's office had recently represented Brian Luc in a DUI case and a firearms case, for which he is still on probation.

Describing Brian Luc as "a potential prosecution witness ... an important witness in this case," Assistant District Attorney Linda Allen said that because the public defender's office still represents him, it had a conflict of interest and could not represent his brother in the murder case.

Public Defender Jeff Adachi argued that once Brian Luc was sentenced to probation six months ago, he was no longer the public defender's client.

But San Francisco Superior Court Judge Lucy Kelly McCabe seemed to side with the prosecution.

"In my 25 years in court, I've never had a public defender not declare a conflict" in a similar case, McCabe said.

However, McCabe decided to let both sides file briefs on the issue and ordered them to return at 10:30 a.m. Thursday for her ruling and to continue the arraignment of Binh Thai Luc.

Brian Luc, who was in court as well Wednesday, was also arrested Sunday on suspicion of possession of narcotics, being a felon in possession of ammunition and violation of his probation.

The public defender on Wednesday declined to represent Brian Luc, who was assigned a private attorney and ordered to return for arraignment on the unrelated charges on April 3.

Adachi said outside of court that attorneys from his office met with Binh Luc and other family members in the past few days.

One of those attorneys, Deputy Public Defender Steve Olmo, said Luc is "a hard-working man" who works in construction trades.

"The family and friends that we spoke to are shocked that he's in this position," Olmo said.

Adachi also questioned the changing facts in the case since it was uncovered Friday.

"Initially we heard it was a ... murder-suicide, then we heard it was a shooting case and now we're hearing something else," he said. "There's a lot of speculation about what this case really is."

%related%

Prosecutors have charged Binh Luc with five counts of murder with special circumstances. They allege that he committed multiple murder in the commission of robbery and burglary, that he used a blunt instrument to kill the victims and that he was lying in wait before killing one of the victims.

Police Chief Greg Suhr initially said Friday it appeared that some of the victims had been shot, and that the case was considered to be isolated to the house at 16 Howth St., but said on Sunday that some sort of "edged weapon" was used in the killings, although no weapon has been found.

The case was reported at 7:45 a.m. Friday when a family member entered the home and called 911 after encountering three of the bodies.

Police responded and found two other victims dead inside the house.

Police have not confirmed reports that the elder victims were husband and wife, and that the other three victims were their daughter, son and son's girlfriend.

The medical examiner's office on Monday released the names of the victims. The women were identified as Wan Yi Xu, 62; Chia Huei Chu, 30; and Ying Xue Lei, 37, while the men were identified as Hua Shun Lei, 65, and Vincent Lei, 32.

Suhr said at a news conference on Sunday that investigators believe Luc had a relationship with the victims but declined to elaborate.

The special circumstances charged along with the murder counts make Binh Thai Luc eligible for the death penalty, but district attorney's office spokeswoman Stephanie Ong Stillman said it is "very unlikely" that the district attorney will seek capital punishment.

The case has also drawn interest because of its connection to federal immigration policy.

Binh Thai Luc had been ordered deported after serving his sentence for a 1997 conviction on second-degree robbery and assault with a firearm charges in Santa Clara County, but authorities in Vietnam declined to provide the appropriate travel documents for his deportation and he was ultimately released.