Inspector Ken Esposto is looking forward to retirement after 31 years on the San Francisco police force. He has spent the past seven of them working mostly by himself, staring at a computer screen in a closed room. Earlier this month he began training his replacement, Officer Andrea Weyl, an energetic 33-year-old who is willing to trade the excitement of chasing criminals on the street for Esposto's lonely work.

"It's a case of the grizzled veteran and the bright-eyed newcomer," said Lt. Jason Fox, who supervises the pair. "It's as old as police work itself."

Esposto, 56, is tall and husky. Weyl has close-cropped red hair and a slight build. They share an office in the department's Special Victims Unit, their computers facing away from the door so that other officers do not have to see what they are looking at hour after hour, day after day: a seemingly endless procession of digital images of children being raped and abused.

"It's nice to have somebody around," said Esposto, sitting at his work computer, which he confiscated from a child pornographer three years ago. "It's nice to have a partner."

Since 2004, Esposto has been the lone investigator in the department's Internet crimes against children unit. His skills include a working knowledge of computer forensics, an ability to discern the ages of child victims by looking at pictures and a lot of patience.

"I may have to spend literally hours going through hundreds or thousands of images and bookmarking them," Esposto said. "That's what Andrea is going to have to understand."

%related%

Weyl, who joined the department seven years ago, came from the violence reduction team in the Western Addition. She said she did not share much of what she was learning with her friends and family. "I used to go home and say: 'I chased this guy through Sunnydale. It was awesome,'" she said. "Now I say: 'My day was all right. How was yours?'"

Both investigators said the nature of their daily viewing was gruesome, particularly videos, and especially those with sound. In some videos, Esposto said, children look into the camera, using their eyes to express their torment. He looks for details that might reveal the locations of the crimes.

"I never get mad, never pass judgment, never have an opinion," he said. "I just do the investigation." He rarely talks shop with other police officers. "It makes people uncomfortable," Esposto said. "Even here."

Earlier this month Weyl began what eventually will be thousands of hours of training in computer forensics and child abuse investigations.

"I asked for it," she said, "because there were too many cases for Inspector Esposto to handle, and I just wanted to make sure more cases got the attention they deserved."

By most estimates, the global online child pornography market is worth billions of dollars a year, but no one knows how many billions, Esposto said. Nor can anyone say with certainty how big the problem is in San Francisco. At a recent training session, however, Esposto used a computer program that allowed him to find locations where child pornography was being viewed. "In a time frame of an hour, we saw at least 25 locations in the San Francisco Bay Area with people that had suspicious files," he said.

Esposto handles about 50 Internet cases a year, splitting his time between online investigations and other child abuse cases in the city. Until recently he could only respond to tips from the National Center for Missing and Exploited Children, outside law enforcement agencies or other beats within the SFPD because the department lacked resources for proactive child pornography investigations.

"That's why they brought me here, to learn from Ken, and they're hoping the two of us together can start doing more proactive investigations," Weyl said. "If you figure that he's had that many cases part time, what's really going on out there when we start digging?"

Digging means capturing images from computers and tracing them to physical locations and, ultimately, to perpetrators. In the best cases, the authorities are able to identify the victims in the images and locate them. Esposto said at least five of his cases last year resulted in rescued children.

"At least 35 percent of people that engage in child pornography also engage in activities of child abuse, of abusing children sexually, so there's a direct connect with the two," Esposto said, citing research on police records. "In the child pornography cases, these children are victimized over and over again, every time their photo is shown and shared."

Weyl's journey to the SVU began in October 2010. While she and her partner were walking a beat in the Western Addition, they noticed a camper van parked near a children's playground. They approached the vehicle after a man poked his head out the door, saw the police, and quickly ducked back inside.

"I looked in and there were just images of kids everywhere," Weyl said. "Kids' toys, Mary-Kate and Ashley videos. Video cameras were mounted inside, pointing inward. He had a pretty sophisticated computer setup."

She brought the case to Esposto and they worked it as a team. Weyl monitored the suspect for three months while she learned to write a warrant for suspected child pornography. The case went to federal court after the authorities discovered tens of thousands of files containing child pornography on the suspect's computers.

"That case turned out to be the largest child pornography case in the history of the department," Fox said. "I saw, then, Officer Weyl's work ethic and desire to put these people away."

Last Friday afternoon, Weyl and Esposto assembled a team of plainclothes police officers to help serve a search warrant on a Richmond District residence. Just after 6:30 p.m., the team entered the second-floor apartment without incident. Moments later, one occupant, Christian Schiefen, 34, was in handcuffs. His stunned wife sat in the couple's living room, guarded by two officers. No children lived in the house.

After an initial search, Esposto and Weyl began interviewing Schiefen while two officers tried to calm his wife with casual conversation.

Schiefen, dressed in sweatpants and a T-shirt, sat wide-eyed and fidgety, according to the investigators' accounts.

"We're here to try to clear something up," Esposto said, before asking a series of questions that began with Schiefen's computer habits and led to his preference in pornography.

"Don't worry, man, everybody has their thing," Weyl said, wanting the suspect to relax and continue talking.

"I might look for young women," Schiefen said.

"And if they're under 18, you still find them attractive and you look at them," Esposto said.

After an hourlong interview, Weyl talked with Schiefen's wife, who tearfully asked, "Is this really happening?"

Schiefen was arrested on suspicion of possessing child pornography and taken to jail. The police left with two desktop computers, a laptop, two external hard drives and a cell phone as evidence.

Later, thinking about Schiefen's wife, Weyl said, "Wouldn't you rather hear that your partner was a drug dealer than someone looking at child pornography?"

Driving away from the scene, Esposto seemed satisfied with the night's work.

"You can't say that it's a joyous experience, but I now know that that person is not going to victimize a kid," he said. "I can wipe this clean now. This one's gone."

To switch gears after work, Esposto said, he likes to swim and read, mostly books on United States history. He has encouraged Weyl to indulge her hobbies too. "I tell her: 'Have your personal life. Have a lot of interests. Don't let this consume you,'" he said.

Still, he added, "You never get numb. I still have a tough time with it, but that's my crime scene."

That logic makes sense to Weyl.

"When he first told me that, it helped me a lot," she said. "I think I'll get better at it over time. But if Ken hasn't gotten used to it, I'm not going to get used to it. In fact, I would be worried about myself if I ever got used to it."

This article also appears in the Bay Area edition of The New York Times.