The focus of the combined organization will be on investigative and accountability journalism, with a staff of approximately 70.

The merger agreement, signed Tuesday, ends a five-month period of uncertainty at the two-year-old Bay Citizen that included the death of its founder, billionaire philanthropist Warren Hellman, and the resignation of its CEO.

While technically a merger, a similar deal in the corporate world would be termed an acquisition, with Berkeley-based CIR assuming a dominant role on the board and in the management of the combined organization. No one from The Bay Citizen's current senior editorial or technology management teams will have a leadership role in the expanded organization.

The Bay Citizen will likely no longer cover breaking news or culture, as CIR leaders have said they see those as commodities that don't fit the expanded organization's core mission. CIR is also considering whether to continue providing coverage for The New York Times. The Bay Citizen's reporting currently appears twice weekly in the Bay Area section of The Times.

Proponents of the deal, in the works since December, say each of the two nonprofit organizations will bring its strengths to the other: CIR brings The Bay Citizen the prestige and heft of a well-established outlet that breaks state, national and international stories, while The Bay Citizen brings a fast-paced newsroom built for the Internet era, a donor and membership base of more than 8,000 and healthy cash reserves.

%related%

"The goal here is to have an organization that would have a strong local focus in the Bay Area as well as have an opportunity and the ability to do stories that are relevant to California, as well as national and international stories," said Robert Rosenthal, CIR's executive director. CIR will operate three brands — The Bay Citizen, covering the local region; California Watch, a project founded in 2009 to report on statewide issues; and CIR, which for more than 30 years has reported on hundreds of major stories, and which earlier this year won a MacArthur Award for Creative and Effective Institutions, bringing $1 million.

Those brands will all work in one newsroom — at a location still to be determined — bringing local stories to a national and international audience and relevant national and global stories to the Bay Area.

"I'm excited to see what the new organization can do," said Brian Kelley, The Bay Citizen's interim CEO.   "The merger brings together the strengths of both of our organizations, expanding our capabilities in journalism and technology."

Bay Citizen reporter Aaron Glantz, chairman of the organization's Media Workers Guild unit, expressed relief that the process was nearly complete and the uncertainty over. "We are very excited," he said in a text message, after speaking to colleagues. "This is good for journalism. We look forward to working with our new colleagues and being part of one of the most aggressive newsrooms on the West Coast."

Jeff Ubben, current chairman of The Bay Citizen's board of directors, and the family of the late financier Warren Hellman, founder of The Bay Citizen, together committed more than $4 million in additional funding to the merged entity, Rosenthal said.

"Our dad felt strongly that democracy only works if there is a vibrant press, and that local journalism in particular needed strong community support in order to survive and fulfill its essential mission," Hellman's son Marco ("Mick") Hellman said in a press release. "Our family agrees with that point of view. We feel that the merger with CIR offers the opportunity to renew leadership, add strength to the reporting staff, and diversify revenue models and content distribution channels."

Warren Hellman founded The Bay Citizen (initially known by the name of its parent organization, the Bay Area News Project) after watching in despair as the Hearst Corporation threatened to shut down the financially hemorrhaging San Francisco Chronicle in 2009. Hellman, a noted investment banker and philanthropist, considered buying the paper before he decided to start a new, online news organization instead. Hellman initially gave $5 million to start The Bay Citizen, then added another $1 million. The funds were the cornerstones of an ambitious fundraising effort that ultimately brought in $17.5 million.

"Warren cared a lot about San Francisco, and he genuinely believed strong journalism was important to a strong community," said Jonathan Weber, the site's first editor-in-chief, who is now the West Coast bureau chief for Reuters. "He saw the dramatic weakening of journalism in the Bay Area, and he decided to do something about it."

The Bay Citizen launched in May 2010. It has won the Sigma Delta Chi Award from the Society of Professional Journalists and the James Madison Freedom of Information Award.

The recent series of changes at the organization began last fall, when Weber and Lisa Frazier, the chief executive of The Bay Citizen, announced their departures. In December, Warren Hellman died of complications from leukemia at age 77. In February, Interim Editor-in-Chief Steve Fainaru also left, completing the creation of what Kelley, the interim CEO, called "a leadership vacuum."

The Bay Citizen board approached CIR's chairman, former San Francisco Chronicle Editor Phil Bronstein, about the vacant CEO position. Bronstein wasn't interested in the job, he said, but instead suggested the merger. In early February, the two organizations announced they were exploring the possible union and that their respective boards would vote within 30 days. Extra time was needed to ensure that funders would continue to support the merged entity.

Within the past two weeks, Tom Goldstein, the interim dean of the University of California's Berkeley Graduate School of Journalism, resigned from The Bay Citizen's board. Goldstein said he was the last member of the board who wanted to see The Bay Citizen remain independent. (Another board member, Andrew Woeber, a managing director of the investment bank Greenhill & Co., also left in recent weeks.)

The merger became official on Tuesday when the boards of directors of both organizations voted to approve it. Under the law, California Attorney General Kamala Harris oversees mergers of nonprofit corporations. Harris now has 20 days to review the merger. Unless Harris determines that the missions of the two nonprofit news organizations are incompatible, the merger would take effect at the end of the 20-day review period.

Under the terms of the agreement, the BANP will be dissolved and the two boards will merge to form a 19-member board of directors, although several of those positions are currently vacant. Six people remain on The Bay Citizen's board, while eight are on CIR's board, with two CIR board members — David Weir and Dan Noyes — assuming new, nonvoting roles as "co-founder emeritus," Bronstein said.

Bronstein will become executive chairman, overseeing operations. He said he will work closely with Rosenthal, who will remain executive director. Rosenthal worked for Bronstein as managing editor at The Chronicle. While Rosenthal will report to Bronstein, he said his role will be editorially focused, while Bronstein will work with funders. The two will earn the same salary; in 2010, according to CIR's filing with the Internal Revenue Service, Rosenthal earned $203,750.

In addition, CIR's Associate Director Christa Scharfenberg, Editorial Director Mark Katches, Director of Digital Media Sharon Tiller and Director of Technology Chase Davis will continue to hold those roles in the new organization. Kelley, The Bay Citizen's interim CEO, who had previously been chief technology officer, will leave.

The merger marks a step forward in Rosenthal's effort to turn around the once-struggling Center for Investigative Reporting. Founded in 1977, it had garnered notice and awards for stories that aired on PBS' "Frontline" and CBS' "60 Minutes," but its finances remained precarious. "When I became executive director" in January 2008, Rosenthal wrote last year, "the organization was at risk."

"I was basically starting from scratch with a staff of seven people and a budget around $1.5 million," Rosenthal wrote. "Much of that funding was dedicated to a documentary film project. There were no major funds in any pipeline."

CIR now has a staff of 40 and a budget of about $6 million, he said. The new organization will have a budget of $10.5 million in 2012 and a staff of approximately 70. Rosenthal and Bronstein said they did not anticipate any layoffs, at least initially.

As with any startup, change is almost constant, and survival is always precarious. A venture similar to The Bay Citizen, the Chicago News Cooperative, also a publishing partner of The New York Times, suspended operations earlier this year.

The Bay Citizen was launched with big plans. "The Bay Citizen had a very ambitious and expansive mission to try to beef up the creation and production of high-quality journalism about issues important to the Bay Area," said Weber, the founding editor.

The organization faced difficult questions, particularly as it defined its mission. Should it cover breaking news? What about the arts and culture? Weber answered both affirmatively. "It was my firm view, if you're going to be a news site, you have to cover the news," Weber said. "If you said, 'Well, we're not going to cover these breaking stories because the Chronicle is going to cover them,' you can't create a site with regular readership."

Similarly, he said, "The culture side of things is very central to people's lives in the Bay Area. If you say you'll only cover public policy, by definition you are only covering a small segment of things that people care about and are important to community."

With fewer than a dozen reporters at its peak, the site was stretched thin trying to meet this broad mission, in addition to its partnership with The New York Times, Weber said.

%related%

Now, CIR will decide which, if any, of those three areas — breaking news, culture and the partnership with The Times — will survive.

"There's definitely going to be changes in the editorial strategy," Rosenthal said. "The core is going to be much more focused on accountability investigative reporting. Breaking news is not going to be our forte. The value we have — why news organizations around the world want to work with us — is giving people stories that they can't get elsewhere."

Bronstein said to expect more emphasis on journalism that helps people find solutions to problems, something that he often touted during his tenure at the Chronicle. Foundations that give grants to CIR expect it, he said. "That's one of the healthiest things that's happened to our profession in years, the support for high-impact, solutions-based journalism," he said. "People get nervous that it's crossing the line or coming close to advocacy. It's helping people get to a solution."

As for The New York Times, Rosenthal said, "That's going to be something we'll assess during the transition period. We really want to look at the pluses and negatives around it."

Jim Schachter, associate managing editor of The New York Times, said he hoped The Bay Citizen would continue to bolster The Times' Bay Area coverage. "We have been extremely proud of the reporting that our colleagues at The Bay Citizen have done for the last two years," Schachter said. "We think that the Bay Area can only benefit from muscular, enterprising journalism."

"We're huge admirers of the Center for Investigative Reporting," Schachter said. "Should the merger be completed, we're looking forward to having a conversation with the new management that emerges about working together."

The changes, said current and former Bay Citizen staff members, will be bittersweet. The Bay Citizen "has one of the highest concentrations of journalistic talent and journalistic quality in the Bay Area," said Gerry Shih, who was a reporter for The Bay Citizen from its launch until December, when he left to join Reuters as a technology reporter. "Pound for pound, the staff there was phenomenal. It was a massive privilege to be working along with those people. And coming up on two years, we produced a lot of great work."

Jeanne Carstensen, executive managing editor of The Bay Citizen, said, "With its tremendous diversity, the Bay Area has always presented a challenge for local news organizations. It's the nature of the beast. Our small, feisty newsroom reported on a lot of important local news and culture stories that wouldn't have been covered otherwise.  I'm very proud of our insightful, hard-hitting coverage of the pension debate, the rise of Mayor Ed Lee, ranked choice voting, San Francisco's Civic Art Collection, Oscar Grant and so many other topics."

The good news, Shih said, is that "CIR is an organization with significant stature and quality in journalism."

On the other hand, Shih said, "It's undeniable that The Bay Citizen is not going to be The Bay Citizen that was originally founded."

Dan Fost is a freelance writer, the former media columnist for the San Francisco Chronicle, and the author of the baseball book, "Giants Past and Present." You can reach him at danfost@gmail.com.