Mirkarimi also wants the city to pay for his attorney's fees "as a remedy for prejudicial abuse of discretion and violation of due process."

Tuesday's court filing marks Mirkarimi's first official response to his suspension. By challenging Lee's decision in court, where the rules are clearly defined, Mirkarimi may be able to avoid hearings before the Ethics Commission and the Board of Supervisors, which have no clear set of guidelines on how to conduct proceedings for ousting an elected officeholder.

Lee said he wasn't surprised by the filing. "It was not unexpected, to be perfectly candid. We know that he did not want to step down. I expected him to do everything possible to not have to," he told reporters Tuesday afternoon.

After Mirkarimi was sentenced last week to three years' probation for falsely imprisoning his wife, Eliana Lopez, during an argument on Dec. 31, Lee gave him an ultimatum: resign or face official misconduct proceedings. When Mirkarimi refused to step down, Lee suspended him and filed charges against him.

In Tuesday's court filing, David Waggoner, Mirkarimi's attorney, argued that the suspension was illegal, because Mirkarimi was not sheriff on Dec. 31 and that the incident for which he pleaded guilty did not occur at work and does not interfere with his duties as sheriff.

At the time of the Dec. 31 incident, Mirkarimi was a member of the Board of Supervisors. He was sworn in as sheriff on Jan. 8 and was arrested on Jan. 12 for three misdemeanor charges, including domestic violence battery. Prosecutors dropped those charges earlier this month, after Mirkarimi agreed to plead guilty to the misdemeanor false imprisonment charge.

%related%

In the filing, Waggoner cited previous court rulings — including in a 1980 case involving San Francisco and former airport commissioner Joseph Mazzola — that official misconduct must be related to the office and must occur while the accused is in office.

Waggoner also argued that the city denied Mirkarimi his due process by suspending him for a misdemeanor and that definition of the "official misconduct" in the San Francisco City Charter is unconstitutional.

"The law is crystal clear that an elected official cannot be removed for conduct that occurred before they took office and is not directly related to their job responsibilities," Waggoner said in a statement. "Mayor Lee's suspension of Ross Mirkarimi violates the law in several respects and we are asking the court to intervene and reinstate him."

Waggoner's argument directly contradicts the claims made by the mayor and the City Attorney's Office in the official misconduct charges against Mirkarimi, filed last Wednesday. According to those charges, the misconduct did not have to occur while Mirkarimi was sheriff, nor did it have to be "related to the specific duties" of his office.

But Lee noted that many of the allegations against Mirkarimi do overlap directly with his duties as sheriff.

"The Sheriff is the City official charged by law with receiving prisoners and overseeing the jails," the charges state. "Sheriff Mirkarimi's one-day sentence to county jail undermines his ability to receive inmates and to supervise the County jails."

The charges also cite the sheriff's close relationship with the city's Adult Probation Department ("Sheriff Mirkarimi committed criminal acts that could and did result in Sheriff Mirkarimi serving three years of probation"), his role in responding to domestic violence cases ("Sheriff Mirkarimi engaged in acts of domestic violence"), and his responsibility for "ensuring the legal and judicious imprisonment of inmates."

Waggoner said he will ask the court to set a date to hear arguments on the case in the next week.

Barring a decision from the court, the five-member Ethics Commission will hold hearings on the Mirkarimi case in the next few weeks, according to Lee. If the commission votes to recommend sustaining the charges against Mirkarimi, the Board of Supervisors will hold hearings on whether to oust him.

Nine of the board's 11 members must approve his removal.

For now, Vicki Hennessy is the interim sheriff. Lee appointed her to the post last week, after he suspended Mirkarimi.