San Francisco detectives, crime scene investigators and medical examiners on Friday were trying to determine why five people were killed inside an orange, two-story home near City College of San Francisco.

Four of the five victims — two men and two women — are related to each other, according to San Francisco Police Department Commander Lynn Tomioka. The fifith victim, also a woman, was likely an acquaintance, Tomioka said.

At least two of the victims died from apparent gunshot wounds, but officers have not yet recovered any weapons from the home at 16 Howth St., according to Tomioka.

Police Chief Greg Suhr said another family member discovered three of the bodies when she let herself into the home Friday morning. She called 911 around 7:47 a.m. When officers arrived, they found two more bodies, according to Suhr.

Suhr described the crime scene as "complicated." One man's body was found in the threshold of the home, while the bodies of another man and a woman were found in the garage, he said. Inside the house, one woman's body was found upstairs, and another woman's body was found downstairs.

Police have yet to confirm the incident as a murder-suicide, but Tomioka said officers were not searching for suspects.

"We believe everybody involved, at this point in the investigation, is in the residence," she told reporters outside the home Friday afternoon.

Tomioka said officers were waiting for the medical examiner's office to determine the cause of death for all of the victims, information that might help investigators determine who committed the crimes.

"We don't know anything that gives us direction one way or the other," Tomikoa said.

According to Tomioka, the home "was not known to the local officers from Ingleside station," which is nearby.

A man who identified himself only as Clark and said he lives in the home directly next door called the family "really nice people." He said he had heard a "boom sound" at around 2 a.m. Thursday night, but said that there were often loud noises around Ocean Avenue at night.

"There was a sound about like, 'Get down', or something like that," Clark said, visibly shaken. "I don't know which [sound] goes first, but it's like both is happening."

"I don't even know how to react right now," he added. "It's pretty disorienting with everything that's happened. We were just like one wall that separates us."

Stephanie Marquez, who lives across the street, said she didn't know any of the people inside the home, but was shocked to find police and crime scene tape on her street Friday morning.

"I just walked out to my car to leave and all of a sudden this is what I get surrounded by," she said. Marquez said she hadn't heard anything out of the ordinary last night or this morning.

Mayor Ed Lee released a statement about the deaths this afternoon, calling them "a terrible tragedy."

"I extend, on behalf of the city, our support and sympathy to all family members and friends of the victims involved in this crime," he said.