The hopefuls filed past a gleaming white pickup truck bearing the department's special recruiting insignia, a relic from a more prosperous time. In 2006, the city began pouring millions of dollars into scouting for and hiring over 100 new officers, only to lay off 80 of them after failed union negotiations in 2010.

The department reached a high of 837 officers in November 2008, but the number has fallen to 636, according to city records. With a rapidly shrinking police force and soaring violent crime rates, the City Council decided to finance the first police academy class in four years. But the new recruits will barely stanch the bleeding.

From the hundreds of applicants, the department will offer training to only 55 new hires. Not all of the recruits will finish the six-month academy training, though, and by June 2013, officials estimate they will have just 617 officers on the Oakland force.

"We lose so many people through attrition," said Juan Sanchez, an officer who does background checks on the  contenders. "We just don't have enough."

Inside the auditorium on exam day, the mood was a mixture of stoicism and nerves. The aspiring police officers, most of them men, padded across a cavernous red-carpeted auditorium and seated themselves behind rows of folding tables and fresh exam booklets, tapping their fingers and legs. Among them were Iraq war veterans, officers who had been laid off, schoolteachers, security guards and pizza delivery boys.

"Oh Lord, let's get this over with," said Stephen Omatta, 26, a third-grade teacher from Tracy who said he wanted a career change. "I'm so tired of it. State exams? Don't even get me started."

Chiew Kuang, a fuzzy-haired 23-year-old who grew up in East Oakland, approached the exam room doors quietly. "It's been a dream of mine, ever since I was a kid," he said.

The recruitment is the first major hiring campaign since 2006, when the city spent more than $1 million on advertising for recruits, according to city records. In 2008, the department established a Web site and a recruiting hotline, and it bought a van, a trailer and the pickup truck, emblazoned with a now erroneous claim: "testing monthly."

That recruitment effort began after voters in 2004 passed Measure Y, a parcel tax to finance violence-prevention programs and the salaries of community policing officers. Mayor Ron Dellums pledged in 2008 to raise the department's staffing levels to 803 officers. When it attracted few job seekers, the City Council authorized the use of more than $7 million of Measure Y funds.

The city has had difficulty finding solutions to the staffing difficulties. Faced with more immediate budget problems, council members consistently rejected proposals to rehire laid-off officers who did not require expensive training, leading to new costs for the education of rookies. In November, voters rejected a parcel tax that could have helped finance the police.

While some initiatives — a separate academy for recruits from other departments, the rehiring of 10 officers and a program for officers who will be placed in schools, financed by a federal grant — have helped slow the attrition rate, the number of officers continues to drop.

Recruiters have visited community colleges and sent job postings to the N.A.A.C.P. and other groups, even as the department has grappled with tremendous challenges. As the Police Department's response to the Occupy Oakland protests was scrutinized across the nation, a federal judge ordered the police chief, Howard Jordan, to begin reporting to a monitor after several missed deadlines in a police misconduct case.

Despite the difficulties of policing the state's most violent city, the department received 2,300 applications for the open positions. About 60 percent of the 1,330 applicants who took the test are expected to pass and move on to a physical exam, followed by an interview with a panel of police officials and residents and a background investigation.

"Look how many people are here today," said Eddie Silva, 26. He said he had applied for eight police jobs in three years. "You've got to be really patient to get into this career."

This article also appears in the Bay Area edition of The New York Times.