"He sounded like most other guys who call up the first time and want to get it done to meet the court requirement," said  Sinclair, the founder and director of Man Alive.

Mirkarimi pleaded guilty earlier this month to one charge of misdemeanor false imprisonment and must attend 52 weeks of domestic violence education classes as a condition of his probation. The charge arose from an argument  Mirkarimi had with his wife, Eliana Lopez, on Dec. 31, in which he grabbed her by the arm.  Lopez tearfully showed the bruising to a neighbor the next day, but later said charges of domestic violence battery, child endangerment and dissuading a witness against her husband were unwarranted.

On Wednesday, Mayor Ed Lee of San Francisco suspended  Mirkarimi without pay for official misconduct.

After being sentenced in a plea deal that dropped the initial charges,  Mirkarimi told reporters that he had accepted responsibility for his "arrogance and anger issues" but refused to say that he had injured his wife.

"If Ross came to our class and he wouldn't say, 'Yeah, I grabbed her arm,' then he wouldn't get into the class,"  Sinclair said. "If he fails the program, he would by law be sent to jail."

Mirkarimi attended a domestic violence orientation at the San Francisco Department of Probation on Thursday, at which he received a list of requirements for completing his program.

"If you fail to take responsibility for your act of violence for which you're on probation, you will not be accepted in the Domestic Violence program," the form reads.

Domestic violence experts say accountability is the key in the rehabilitation of domestic abusers.

"If they want to learn and they complete the classes, chances are there will be some improvement," said Beverly Upton, executive director of the San Francisco Domestic Violence Consortium. "But," she said, "if you don't want to change and grow, it's not going to do any good."

Mirkarimi told  Sinclair that the Man Alive classes, which require three hours a week — as opposed to the two-hour state minimum — would interfere with his duties as sheriff and visitation with his son.  Sinclair said he had dismissed that reasoning because  Mirkarimi was suspended pending an investigation by the city's ethics commission, and a court order allows the sheriff to see his son just two hours a day.

Mirkarimi declined repeated requests for comment.

Sinclair said he expected that  Mirkarimi would choose a program other than Man Alive — about 10 programs are certified by the probation department — but said the men in his classes had watched the sheriff's ordeal unfold with interest and insight.

"He's really in denial is what they all say," he said. "They say, 'He sounds like one of us.'"

This article also appears in the Bay Area edition of The New York Times.