Thus far, though, the evidence connecting Luc to the Ingleside crime and the motive remain unknown; San Francisco Police Chief Greg Suhr would only say that "there was a relationship between the suspect and the victims."

Luc has a criminal record and may have gang ties, but police officials said that they did not believe the crime was gang-related. Chief Suhr also refused to address early reports from ABC and KGO that the murders were related to gambling debts.

Police would also not comment on whether any of the victims, three females and two males, were connected to gang activity.

"We're pursuing all leads right now. The investigation's ongoing," Suhr said at this afternoon's press conference. "If we were finished, I would tell you everything that I know right now. I can't do that without jeopardizing the investigation.

Although early reports indicated that the perpetrator was among the dead and that some of the victims were shot to death, Suhr said all the victims suffered blunt force trauma from "an edge weapon."  Investigators have not yet recovered it.

More than 40 crime scene investigators, detectives, medical examiners and police deputies have coordinated the around-the-clock investigation of the "complex" and "very violent" crime scene since a family member discovered the victims' bodies Friday morning, according to Suhr.

SWAT teams and homicide inspectors executed two search warrants related to the crime, one in San Francisco and one in San Mateo. Luc's brother, Brian Luc, was also booked on narcotics possession, probation violations, and other unrelated charges. The Lucs live at a residence in San Francisco, but police would not say where the arrests took place.

Commander Michael Biel, who has led the investigation of the crime, complimented Chief Suhr's task force response, a strategy that involves cross-department coordination.

"This case highlighted the task force response that Chief Suhr has implemented since he took over as chief," he said. "It has shown, time and time again, that this is the way to solve crime."

Commander Lynn Tomioka said Luc could have a court date as early as Monday or Tuesday.