Oakland Mayor Jean Quan is refusing to reveal the location of the crime-ridden blocks that make up her "100 block" strategic crime-fighting plan, despite repeated requests from City Council members and The Bay Citizen.

According to Quan, the plan focuses police department operations and social services in the streets where 92 percent of the city's violent crime occurs. But Quan refuses to say exactly where those 100 blocks are, leaving city leaders and residents in the dark about whether the plan is actually working.

Although many city departments have been privy to the specific blocks, the mayor's office officially declined The Bay Citizen's repeated requests for such information on Monday, citing a public records act exemption that allows "law enforcement intelligence" to remain under wraps from the public.

"We haven't given it to anybody," said Sue Piper, the spokeswoman for the mayor's office. "We're working in these areas and right now, if we were to release something specific, it would jeopardize what's going on."

Some City Council members are demanding more transparency from the mayor's office. They cite a new report they received Sunday, which shows that crime has increased 14 percent in Oakland from this time last year.

"This is baloney," said council member Ignacio De La Fuente, who said his office had made repeated requests for the location of the blocks. "There is an increase in crime in some areas of the city, and it's totally irresponsible of this mayor to not provide information."

%related%

Others said they never got a chance to vet the plan. "The council was not consulted on the 100-block plan, and we were not given specific details of the plan, and we did not authorize it," council member Rebecca Kaplan said. "I want to make sure we're keeping our promise to the communities and maintaining the public safety in all of our neighborhoods."

Since Quan officially announced the strategy at her public safety summit in October, details about the plan have been sparse and often inconsistent.

During her presentation, Quan said her office and the police department had identified the 100 blocks through an analysis of crime data. The plan, she said, would focus multiple city departments and other agencies "on the 5 percent of the city where 90 percent of shootings and homicides occur." She outlined a broad strategy involving deploying more police to high-crime areas, collaborating with other law enforcement agencies, and prioritizing city services, including blight abatement, in the 100 blocks.

"Not surprising, these same 100 blocks have some of the highest joblessness and school dropout rates," a leaflet from the mayor's office reads. "Many of these areas straddle economically depressed commercial corridors that attract prostitution and open-air drug markets."

According to Piper, the police department, the city Public Works Agency and the Office of Parks and Recreation know which blocks are part of the mayor's plan. These departments have been told to work together to address problems in those blocks, without waiting for complaints from residents.

Piper said Monday that the value of the plan is in facilitating communication between different city departments and law enforcement agencies already operating in the area.

"It's a different way of thinking," Piper said. "The problem is, people were working in their own silos. Now everybody has in their mind, 'We really need to think about what we could be doing differently. What we could do better.'"

As part of its strategy, the police department decreased the number of beats and reassigned some of the city's problem-solving officers to special "crime reduction teams," an idea that alarmed some residents who feared the changes would divert officers away from their neighborhoods. But after The Bay Citizen reported that some had been assigned to special operations in the 100 blocks, Quan denied that that was a part of her strategy, saying the teams were originally planned by former police Chief Anthony Batts, who resigned last year.

The problem-solving, or community policing officers, are mandated by Measure Y, a parcel tax to fund violence prevention programs and community policing officers that was passed by voters in 2004.

As early as January, despite a lack of statistical data, Quan and police Chief Howard Jordan announced the plan was working.

At a press conference on Jan. 17, Jordan said the department had tried out the strategy for a short time in West Oakland last summer. "We found that by focusing on a small group and a small area, we had a significant reduction in violent crime," he said, adding that his assessment was based on anecdotal information, not numbers.

Quan said the blocks were in the general areas of Elmhurst, Havenscourt and West Oakland, but said she she did not want to release the specific streets because "we're worried about sitgmatizing some neighborhoods," she said at the same press conference.

On Jan. 26, The Bay Citizen filed a public records request for "a map and list of boundary lines/streets included in mayor Jean Quan's 100-block plan."

After several weeks, the city responded with a promotional leaflet showing just the outlines of neighborhoods included in the plan — the same map it had previously released to the public. Piper said then she could not release the specific blocks because they were considered confidential police information.

"The City is not releasing specific streets and boundaries because it [is] considered law enforcement intelligence and is protected under Government Code 6254(f)," she wrote.

Lawyers for The Bay Citizen promptly issued a response to the city, citing case law that defines any information shared with other city departments as public record, and urging officials to reconsider the denial because the 100 blocks is based on crime data, which is public record.

Reached by a phone on Monday, Piper again denied the request, saying the information was "internal to the police department."

"All of us are losing patience, because we want to give the mayor and the city administrator respect and the time to come up with a so-called overall strategic safety plan," De La Fuente said. "But we've been waiting for that damn plan, and nothing."

The mayor's office and the city administrator's office are expected to give a presentation on the 100 blocks to the City Council at the end of April. It will be the first official briefing on the matter for the council.

The presentation could not come soon enough for some residents, who say they believe that the increase in crimes in other parts of the city may be due to special enforcement operations in the 100 blocks.

After reading recent Bay Citizen articles, Marleen Sacks, a lawyer who has sued the city twice over its use of Measure Y funds and lives in the Oakland hills, filed a public records request for information about the plan.

"The mayor's going all over town claiming, 'This is my public safety plan,' and nobody's seen it," she said. "I'd like to see where they're going. I'd like for the city to be transparent and point out where this hundred-block program really is, and show me some documentation that it actually exists."