The sunlight peeking through the shadows of buildings and trees reminded Lani of the rickshaw obscura, a mobile camera obscura to be housed inside a rickshaw. Within a few hours, he had pulled his exhibition team members away from their computers and loaded them into a small trailer, which they took turns driving around the Marina, searching for the best views from the pinhole camera.

It was a typical workday for Lani, senior artist and head of a team of exhibit designers at the Exploratorium who are working feverishly to prepare for the move of this celebrated science museum to its new home on the Embarcadero.

After over four decades at the Palace of Fine Arts in the Presidio, the museum, founded by Frank Oppenheimer, is scheduled to open at Piers 15 and 17 next year.

Like the original Exploratorium, the new site will feature a unique sensibility of artistic savvy mixed with a Bay Area feel and will be home to a wild mix of the highly creative, hands-on exhibits the museum is famous for.

And for the first time, some of the exhibits, like Lani's rickshaw obscura, will be outdoors.

%related%

By the time a reporter showed up to spend time with Lani and the outdoor exhibit staff, most of the five-member team was sequestered inside a small white trailer, giggling as they watched the parking lot projected on the floor via a small hole cut in the top of the trailer's roof and an angled mirror and lens.

Why all the experiments? "I got distracted by the light beams," Lani said with a goofy smile.

The outdoor program is about placemaking, a word used by both Lani and Tom Rockwell, director of public exhibition at the Exploratorium, to describe the Exploratorium's goal of bringing the museum into the fabric of its environment. One and a half acres of space in and around the piers will feature work that is free and open to the public in addition to interactive pieces accessible only in the ticketed area.

In addition to the 30 or so outdoor exhibits, the new nine-acre, $300 million Exploratorium will feature a cafe, four open gallery spaces, the Bay Observatory, a 200-seat theater and two pedestrian bridges connecting various parts of the piers.

"We decided to treat the site as a campus," Rockwell said. "It's not just about the building, but the space around and between the buildings."

With so many outdoor installations using the natural environment — like Bay Windows, five large glass discs showing a collection of sediment from the bay; or Remote Rains, an area that will shower a "rainstorm" on visitors, with the size of the water drops determined by data gathered by the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration — the new Exploratorium will be uniquely tied to its surroundings. "It's like the city is the museum," Rockwell said.

%13131%

The genesis for the outdoor team came almost a decade ago, according to Rockwell, after the museum secured the waterfront property. And then, in 2009, the museum received a grant to build a smattering of outdoor exhibits (called the Outdoor Exploratorium) around Fort Mason.

The placemaking approach is in vogue right now, as many arts and science institutions look to deepen their relationships to their surroundings.

For example, the creation of a new wing for the Fisher collection, the sprawling private collection of Don Fisher, founder of the Gap clothing company, provides the San Francisco Museum of Modern Art with an opportunity to add more entrances and tweak its public face.

The new design opens side streets like Natoma and Minna to museum visitors. "To use a term from the art world," said Neal Benezra, director of the museum, "it's creating cultural institutions that are site-specific."

As Lani roamed around the office, it seemed striking how much had not been completed — and how relaxed the team appeared. According to Rockwell and Lani, that is part and parcel of the museum's philosophy of tinkering. "We're not just a museum. We're kind of a creative lab or studio," Rockwell said.

But iteration takes trial and error. As he fiddled with a plywood board with holes punched through it, Lani explained his incipient plans for the Lath House — a wooden structure with intersecting beams that will allow for interesting shadows to form depending on the angle of the sun (or light source). He wanted to make the shed move around but seemed unsure about what exactly he was trying to show with the shadow play. Hence, his impromptu plywood experiments.

"It will rotate slowly," he said, his eyes on the round shadows formed by the board. "But what is it supposed to do?" Dusting off his knees, Lani described his process thusly: "I'm just obsessively looking," he said.

This article also appears in the Bay Area edition of The New York Times.