For the past decade, Jose Luis Tejeda felt insulted every time he saw an Alameda-Contra Costa Transit District bus drive past his place of work.

Tejada, 60, starts his job at 5 o'clock every morning on the assembly line at Gillig, a bus manufacturer in Hayward that is known as the last 100 percent American-owned and -made bus company. But AC Transit officials, enamored with European public transit, have only bought buses from Van Hool, a Belgian company, since 2002.

"I felt kind of disappointed," said Tejeda, whose two sons, Cesar and Adolfo, also work at the plant. "I felt underestimated about the quality of my job."

Gillig finally won a contract last week from its hometown transportation agency when AC Transit agreed to buy 40 buses from the company for $16.4 million. With more than 100 buses rolling out of the Hayward plant every month, the order was relatively small, but it was a symbolic victory for Tejeda and other Gillig employees.

%related%

AC Transit had a change of heart after the Teamsters union, which represents most of Gillig's 700 employees, flexed its political muscle in the down-ballot races for the agency's board of directors. The Gillig order was also spurred by the public outcry over money that the cash-strapped agency spent to send its officials on regular trips to Europe, including the salary and expenses of a bus inspector who lived near the Van Hool plant in Belgium.

"We used to have some guy in Europe fully paid for by AC Transit keeping an eye on all the manufacturing. It just didn't make sense," said Elsa Ortiz, an agency director who pushed to buy buses from Gillig. "Now we're buying from a company that's in Hayward just 10 miles away. It's local jobs; it's improving the local economy."

Gillig, which was founded in 1890 to build horse-drawn carriages, is a throwback to an era when manufacturing was king and American workers stayed in the same jobs for decades. Gillig employees earn an average of $40 an hour in salary and benefits. After 25 years, workers receive an all-expenses-paid Hawaiian vacation for themselves and their families.

Alameda County has lost 33,000 manufacturing jobs in the last decade, and it is still struggling to rebound from the recession, yet Gillig has continued to build buses without layoffs at its plant near the San Mateo-Hayward Bridge. Most bus companies in the United States have disappeared, and those that remain are foreign-owned or make only portions of their buses here. Gillig is the only remaining American-owned transit bus company that does all its manufacturing in the United States, according to company officials and industry experts.

But even as the loss of American manufacturing jobs has become an issue in the presidential election, political gridlock in Washington is threatening companies like Gillig. The federal transportation bill, which used to be routinely renewed every six years, has become a battleground as Republicans try to cut spending on public transit.

Although the Senate has passed a two-year transportation bill, the House, unable to settle its differences, has simply kicked the can down the road, extending financing for only a few months at a time, a path it took once again this week. The result is that transit agencies around the country, which depend on the federal government for most of the money they need to buy buses, cannot plan far enough in advance to place orders, said Joe Policarpio,  vice president for sales and marketing at Gillig.

"It's been very, very difficult for our customers to plan, and there is a decrease in market demand," Policarpio said.

The American Public Transportation Association found in a study last year that three-fourths of companies serving the public transit industry had flat or declining revenues because of the uncertainty around federal transportation financing and the recession. Policarpio said that bus orders were down 25 percent industrywide.

Because of the low demand for buses and trains in this country, there are virtually no major American-owned manufacturers. When the Bay Area Rapid Transit agency put out a bid for a $3.4 billion fleet of 775 train cars in 2009, only foreign companies responded. A Canadian company, Bombardier Transportation, is the leading candidate.

"The U.S. is way behind the rest of the world when it comes to public transit," said Paul Oversier, assistant general manager for operations at BART.

Aside from Gillig, there are other companies that build trains and buses in this country. Because of so-called Buy America laws, transit agencies using federal money must purchase rail cars and buses from companies that produce 60 percent of the total value of the vehicle in the United States. That means most foreign companies have manufacturing plants here.

But ordering from foreign companies means extra costs. BART has already spent more than $95,000 in travel expenses this year for employees to visit France, China, South Korea, Mexico, Canada and cities around the United States to inspect plants run by Bombardier and the other two bidders, Hyundai Rotem of South Korea and Alstom of France.

In December, rail cars made by Bombardier in Chicago were recalled because of faulty parts made by a Chinese supplier, highlighting the need for the inspectors, Oversier said.

"It is an example of why the owner needs to be aggressive and do their due diligence when the cars are being designed and built," said Oversier, who declined to comment on how the Chicago recall might affect Bombardier's bid.

%related%

At AC Transit, the Belgian-made Van Hool buses have their fans. Chris Peeples, a longtime agency board member, said the European company produced far more advanced buses than Gillig.

"Our direction to our general manager was to bring a bus over that would embarrass the U.S. bus industry into making a decent bus, and I think we succeeded," Peeples said.

Peeples said that Gillig was not willing to build the buses that AC Transit wanted for its rapid lines — buses with three doors and low floors. But critics said the Belgian buses did not deliver on all the company's promises.

"They were sold to the board on the basis of, you know, how we elite Americans tend to think that everything is done better in Europe, so there was this feeling that if you want good transit, go to Europe," said Greg Harper, who is also on the AC Transit board. "They just didn't turn out to be any of those things. They weren't better priced; they weren't better made."

Gillig makes buses for transit agencies nationwide, including the Santa Clara Valley Transportation Authority in the South Bay and SamTrans in San Mateo County. The company is the second largest manufacturer in North America, making between 25 percent and 35 percent of the 4,000 to 6,000 buses produced here every year, Policarpio said. But the AC Transit contract was cause for extra celebration.

Lyle Funderburk, 37, who installs the rear exit door on the buses, said that his children would point to AC Transit buses on the streets and ask, "Daddy, you built that bus?" and he would answer, "No, we didn't." Now, Funderburk said, "I can tell them, 'Daddy put that door on that bus.'"

This article also appears in the Bay Area edition of The New York Times.