Now, with Sheriff Ross Mirkarimi confronting official misconduct charges, the process is not much clearer.

"It's making it up as you go. If people say different, they're not telling the truth," said Stuart Hanlon, a lawyer who represented Supervisor Ed Jew in 2007 when he faced charges that he'd extorted business owners and falsely claimed to live in the district he was elected to represent. "What's the burden of truth? If hearsay comes in, what do we do? Who gets to ask questions? Is the standard a preponderance of evidence? Is it clear and convincing evidence? Nobody knows. They make it all up."

Mayor Ed Lee suspended Mirkarimi without pay for official misconduct Wednesday, two days after he was sentenced to three years' probation for falsely imprisoning his wife, Eliana Lopez, during an argument on Dec. 31. The case now moves to the city's five-member Ethics Commission, which must consider charges that Mirkarimi failed to uphold the standard of decency required of elected officials by committing acts of domestic violence against his wife.

%related%

The commission won't meet to consider the charges for at least three weeks, said the body's executive director, John St. Croix, who said he needs the time to hire an outside attorney to advise the commission, and to arrange a date that fits with part-time commissioners' schedules.

According to the city charter, after a mayor files official misconduct charges, the commission must hold a hearing and pass a recommendation to the Board of Supervisors, which meets to decide whether the officeholder should be dismissed. But city rules don't define exactly how such hearings are supposed to work.

After Mayor Gavin Newsom announced he would pursue official misconduct charges against Jew in 2007, commissioners took great care to devise rules and procedures that would be fair to both sides, St. Croix said.

"It was highly deliberative. Everyone was being extremely careful," he said.

But he acknowledged that, unlike a court of law, neither side knows the rules until commissioners come up with them. In fact, commissioners' first order of business at special misconduct hearings will be to devise ad hoc rules under which the rest of the sessions will proceed.

%140%

"Because the charter is vague, the interpretation is a little on the broad side," St. Croix said.

Mirkarimi's new attorney, David P. Waggoner, did not respond to a telephone message requesting comment.

The case of Ed Jew was complicated, his former attorney, Hanlon, noted, because Jew's criminal trial had not yet begun when his misconduct proceedings took place, and giving testimony before the Ethics Commission could have jeopardized his criminal defense.

Mirkarimi's case is far more nuanced, and thus will be even more difficult for commissioners to decide, according to Bill Fazio, who represented Jew in 2007 before leaving over disagreements with his client. Jew allegedly defrauded voters into thinking he lived in their district, and then sought $80,000 in bribes for exerting influence as a public official — conduct that fit clearly within the definition of official misconduct.

Mirkarimi's alleged acts didn't occur while he was sheriff; he was still a member of the Board of Supervisors on Dec. 31. And his actions during the argument with his wife didn't involve the exercise of official duties — a so-called legal "nexus" that might provide a logical link between the terms "official" and "misconduct."

In the charges filed against Mirkarimi Wednesday, Lee writes that the city charter "does not require that the wrongful conduct at issue occur while the officer held the office from which the Mayor seeks to remove him," and that the wrongful conduct does not have to be "related to the specific duties" of Mirkarimi's office. But Fazio says the lack of a clear connection complicates the case.

"I have little doubt the commission was unprepared or ill-prepared last time. And this case is more difficult. Ed was charged with felonious conduct. Mirkarimi was charged with a misdemeanor. And when he committed the offense, he wasn't the elected official they're trying to remove him as," Fazio said. "I hope Mirkarimi takes this one to the mat."