San Francisco Superior Court Judge Ronald Albers signed an order Friday allowing Mirkarimi's wife, Eliana Lopez, and the couple's son, Theo, to fly to Veneuzuela on Sunday as long as they return no later than April 28.

The order comes two days after Mayor Ed Lee suspended Mirkarimi from his job as sheriff without pay — and four days after another Superior Court judge sentenced Mirkarimi to three years' probation for falsely imprisoning Lopez during an argument on Dec. 31.

According to documents previously filed by prosecutors, the argument began when Lopez told Mirkarimi she wanted to take Theo to visit her family in Venezuela, where Lopez was once a soap opera actress. Mirkarimi, the documents alleged, became angry, and threatened to use his political office to prevent his wife from leaving the country with their child.

As part of Friday's order, Mirkarimi was required to sign a letter authorizing his wife's trip. The order reveals that Lopez's father "has suffered a recurrence of cancer for which he is currently undergoing chemotherapy in Venezuela."

According to the order, Mirkarimi plans to attend as many counseling sessions "as possible" while Lopez and Theo are in Venezuela. Mirkarimi is required to attend family counseling and 52 weeks of domestic violence prevention classes as part of his sentence. After Lopez returns, the couple intend to begin counseling together, the order says.

Mirkarimi cannot move back into the family home while Lopez and Theo are out of the country. The judge crossed out a sentence in the order that would have given Mirkarimi permission to return to the house he shared with his wife until January, when another judge issued a stay-away order.

That order, which barred Mirkarimi from having any contact with Lopez and Theo, was amended in February to allow Mirkarimi to see his son for two hours each weekday and six hours on one day each weekend.

Since the stay-away order was issued, Mirkarimi has been paying rent to stay with friends, including former Mayor Art Agnos.

While Lopez and Theo are in Venezuela, Mirkarimi can Skype with his son or talk with him on the phone, but he remains barred from having any contact with Lopez. Albers crossed out a section in the order that would have allowed Mirkarimi to speak with his wife.

The order also reveals that since Mirkarimi's suspension without pay, Mirkarimi and Lopez can no longer afford to pay for their son's day care.

Mirkarimi has said that the cost of his legal defense prompted him to agree to a plea bargain. Last week, he pleaded guilty to one misdemeanor charge of false imprisonment; in exchange, prosecutors dropped three other misdemeanor charges — domestic violence battery, dissuading a witness and child endangerment (because the argument between Mirkarimi and Lopez allegedly occurred in front of Theo).

But Mirkarimi's legal bills are continuing to grow.

After his sentencing, Lee gave Mirkarimi an ultimatum: resign or face removal proceedings. Mirkarimi chose to fight for his job, a battle that will include hearings before the city's Ethics Commission and possibly the Board of Supervisors.

He has hired a new attorney, David Waggoner, to represent him during the process.

Read Albers' order here:

Embed:http://www.scribd.com/doc/86524972