It was not a courtroom, but the Verdi Club, the site of a law-and-order-themed evening of storytelling hosted by San Francisco's Porchlight storytelling series on Monday night.

Walker, recently retired from Federal District Court, became something of a local celebrity after his 2010 ruling that Proposition 8, the voter-approved California measure that banned same-sex marriage, was unconstitutional. He became even more of a lightning rod after it was revealed that he is gay. So expectations ran high when he took the stage under yellow and purple lights and the flash of a disco ball, telling the crowd that he had been told not to expect a typical legal audience. "That, I assume, was a compliment to you," he said.

He quipped about how, in the courtroom, he was not used to being accompanied by a piano player, particularly "one that I know when I go on too long is going to start playing."

%related%

Marc Capelle, who was at the piano, played a few bars of the theme music from the "Law and Order" television show.

The audience roared.

Walker, 68, was the headliner for an evening that included Matt Gonzalez, the former San Francisco supervisor; Maurice Caldwell, who was imprisoned for 20 years for a murder he did not commit and was released last year; and Renée Paradis, an appellate lawyer.

It was Paradis who recruited Walker to appear on stage. "I just cold-called him through the State Bar of California website," she said.

Walker has worked about 8,000 cases as a lawyer and presided at 250 to 300 trials in his 21 years as a federal judge — including Perry v. Schwarzenegger, the Proposition 8 case, and Apple Computer v. Microsoft Corporation, a copyright infringement case — so he had a few stories to choose from.

%105%

He did not choose to talk about his more high-profile cases, but instead picked the tale of a plaintiff's attorney gone bad: a man of Eastern European origins who lived lavishly, with a big house and a yacht that he paid for by recovering large amounts of money for his clients. He got into trouble when he began spending the money before the clients got access to it.

"Once you start a scheme of that kind, it's going to unwind on you," Walker said in his authoritative baritone. "And it began to unwind on him."

The attorney had a number of clients — he helped farmworkers in the Napa Valley who were given substandard housing, a woman who fell in a synagogue and a couple whose twins were born with cerebral palsy because of an error at a fertility clinic.

But like the others, when the twins' parents "went to claim what was due them, it wasn't there," Walker said, repeating his refrain with an actor's enunciation.

The crowd seemed to like everything about him, including his looks. John Angelico, near the front, gushed, "He's a silver fox."

Watch Walker's entire monologue here:

Embed:http://www.youtube.com/watch?list=UUrrMNrKJWykf-kxI1uSsARA&v=5JZESQ5JuEU

This article also appears in the Bay Area edition of The New York Times.