Lee and the City Attorney's office filed the charges against Mirkarimi two days after he was sentenced to three years' probation for falsely imprisoning his wife, Eliana Lopez, during an argument on Dec. 31.

The charges allege that Mirkarimi failed to uphold the standard of decency required of all elected offficials by "committing acts of domestic violence against Ms. Lopez that resulted in physical injuries to her; threatening to use his power and status as a City official against her in child custody proceedings; and endangering the health of a child."

The charges also reference a scathing op-ed written Tuesday by Mirkarimi's neighbor, Abraham Mertens. In the piece, Mertens alleged that Lopez pressured him and his wife to detroy evidence and lie to police. The document states that after the incident, "individuals who may have been speaking on behalf of Sheriff Mirkarimi, acting as Sheriff Mirkarimi's agents, or acting in coordination with Sheriff Mirkarimi, dissuaded and intimidated one or more witnesses, discouraged them from speaking with law enforcement authorities, and encouraged them to destroy evidence."

Mirkarimi's attorney, David Waggoner, did not immediately respond to requests for comment.

According to the charges, the wrongful conduct did not have to occur while Mirkarimi was sheriff, nor did it have to be "related to the specific duties" of his office. Mirkarimi was a member of the Board of Supervisors when he falsely imprisoned his wife. He was arrested on Jan. 12, five days after he was sworn in as sheriff.

Still, Lee notes that many of the allegations against Mirkarimi do overlap directly with his duties as sheriff.

"The Sheriff is the City official charged by law with receiving prisoners and overseeing the jails," the charges state. "Sheriff Mirkarimi's one-day sentence to county jail undermines his ability to receive inmates and to supervise the County jails."

The charges also cite the sheriff's close relationship with the city's Adult Probation Department ("Sheriff Mirkarimi committed criminal acts that could and did result in Sheriff Mirkarimi serving three years of probation"), his role in responding to domestic violence cases ("Sheriff Mirkarimi engaged in acts of domestic violence"), and his responsibility for "ensuring the legal and judicious imprisonment of inmates."

With the suspension, Mirkarimi's case now moves to the city's five-member Ethics Commission, which must hold a hearing and issue a recommendation to the Board of Supervisors on whether to sustain the charges.

The board must then vote on whether to remove Mirkarimi from office. If it fails to take action within 30 days, Mirkarimi will be reinstated.

After suspending Mirkarimi Wednesday, Lee swore in Vicki Hennessy as interim sheriff in a ceremony at the mayor's office.

Hennessy is the first female to lead the San Francisco Sheriff's Department. She had retired in 2011 after previously serving as chief deputy of the department and as executive director of the city's Department of Emergency Management.

Lee said, "I trust her, I know her, I know that she will be a great leader for the sheriff's department."

Hennessy said, "This was a difficult time for the city ... this is not necessarily a celebration for me becoming the sheriff but it's me agreeing to be the sheriff so we can get the work done."

Hennessy is not related to former Sheriff Mike Hennessey, who served as sheriff for 32 years before retiring last year, although Lee accidentally spelled Vicki's last name as Hennessey in a letter included in the city attorney's written charges.

Police Chief Greg Suhr and Fire Chief Joanne Hayes-White were also present at the swearing-in ceremony.

Hayes-White said Hennessy "has a lot of credibility" because of her 30-plus years in law enforcement.

Hennessy said she planned on getting right to work this afternoon by meeting with her staff and setting agendas for the next few days.

San Francisco Deputy Sheriffs Association President Don Wilson, who said earlier this week that morale within the department had been affected by the Mirkarimi case, said in a statement Wednesday, "We look forward to working closely with the new sheriff to continue our work protecting the citizens of San Francisco."

Mirkarimi will return to the San Francisco Hall of Justice on Thursday afternoon for an hour-long probation orientation meeting, according to Omid Talai, spokesman for the district attorney's office.

He will be joined by several other people convicted of domestic violence-related offenses at the orientation, Talai said.

Read the charges against Ross Mirkarimi:

Embed:http://www.scribd.com/doc/86264438/Sheriff-Suspension-Charges