Mirkarimi's resignation followed a meeting with San Francisco Mayor Ed Lee Monday afternoon. During that meeting, Lee gave the sheriff an ultimatum: step down within 24 hours or the mayor would begin the process of removing Mirkarimi on official misconduct charges, according to news reports.

Ellen Brin, the undersheriff, will replace Mirkarimi temporarily. Mirkarimi appointed Brin, a 25-year veteran who served two decades in the department's elite Emergency Services Unit, as undersheriff last month.

Mirkarimi's last day in office began as his first day did, enveloped by controversy. The San Francisco Chronicle published a blistering op-ed from one Mirkarimi's neighbors, accusing the sheriff of "abhorrent behavior" and alleging that his wife pressured key witnesses to destroy evidence.

The neighbor, Abraham Mertens, called for Mirkarimi to step down. Mertens is married to Ivory Madison, who, according to court documents, recorded video of Mirkarimi's wife, Eliana Lopez, revealing a bruise she claimed she received during an argument with the sheriff in front of their 2-year-old son on Dec. 31.

Madison contacted police about the Lopez's claims on Jan. 4, four days before Mirkarimi was sworn in as sheriff. On Jan. 12, Mirkarimi was booked into San Francisco County Jail, which he supervised as sheriff, on three misdemeanor charges: domestic violence battery, dissuading a witness and child endangerment.

After judges rejected several attempts by Mirkarimi's legal team to exclude the video of Lopez, Mirkarimi agreed to a plea bargain last week. Mirkarimi pleaded guilty to false imprisonment, a misdemeanor charge that would allow him to carry a weapon; in exchange, prosecutors dropped the three other charges he faced.

As part of his sentence, Mirkarimi is required to attend 52 weeks of domestic violence classes, perform 100 hours of community service, pay a $400 domestic violence fine and attend family counseling.

After his sentencing Monday morning, a tearful Mirkarimi apologized for "the pain he caused" to his family, "to the San Francisco Sheriff's Department and to the people of San Francisco."

"The very public reminder that I'm not the person that I thought I was provides for a dark world where my flaws stand bright. Some time ago I started counseling to address my arrogance and anger issues. I look forward to begin additional counseling that I will be receiving and the couples counseling my wife and I sought during this ordeal but was denied, and hoping that we'll eventually undergo," Mirkarimi said.

On Monday afternoon, Mirkarimi met with Lee for 15 minutes, leaving the mayor's office through a side door and telling reporters that it was "premature" for him to talk. During that meeting, Lee delivered his ultimatum.

If Mirkarimi had not resigned, Lee would have had the option under the city charter to suspend the sheriff for official misconduct. The city's Ethics Commission would have had to hold a hearing on the charges and then make a recommendation to the Board of Supervisors.

Nine of 11 supervisors would have had to approve the charges for Mirkarimi to be removed from office.

Mirkarimi, 50, a lifelong progressive who helped start the local Green Party, and who is now a Democrat, was first elected supervisor in 2004 and was re-elected in 2008. He ran for sheriff last year, after Michael Hennessey, who had held the post for more than 30 years, announced he was stepping down. He won a tight race, edging out Paul Miyamoto, a captain in the sheriff's department.

Mirkarimi, who City Hall colleagues say had trouble cultivating political alliances, cannot go home after leaving office. A stay-away order prohibiting him from having any contact with his wife will remain in effect until he begins his domestic violence counseling, Mirkarimi's defense attorney Lidia Stiglich said.