Mirkarimi will not be spending any time behind bars, because he received credit for time served. He will have to attend 52 weeks of domestic violence classes, perform 100 hours of community service and pay a $400 domestic violence fine. He will also be required to attend family counseling.

After the sentencing, a tearful Mirkarimi told reporters he was "ashamed" and "eternally sorry" for his behavior and the damage it has caused.

"I deeply and humbly apologize for my behavior and the pain it caused to my wife and son, to my colleagues, to the San Francisco Sheriff's Department and to the people of San Francisco. For what happened on Dec. 31, there are no excuses and I accept full responsibility," Mirkarimi said.

"The very public reminder that I'm not the person that I thought I was provides for a dark world where my flaws stand bright. Some time ago I started counseling to address my arrogance and anger issues. I look forward to begin additional counseling that I will be receiving and the couples counseling my wife and I sought during this ordeal but was denied, and hoping that we'll eventually undergo."

After battling with prosecutors for two months and publicly proclaiming his innoccence, Mirkarimi agreed last week to plead guilty to a misdemeanor charge of false imprisonment in exchange for prosecutors dropping three other misdemeanor charges, including domestic violence battery.

Several news outlets, including The Bay Citizen, published reports that the growing cost of his legal defense was one of the factors that led Mirkarimi to agree to a plea bargain.

On Monday, Mirkarimi indicated that he has no plans to step down from his office. "I'm committed to becoming a better public servant, one you can be proud of," he said.

Mirkarimi said "the sheriff's department has been running right and well," but when asked whether he has the moral authority to remain as sheriff, he walked away without answering.

San Francisco Mayor Ed Lee said last week that he is consulting with the city attorney's office and weighing whether to attempt to remove Mirkarimi from office.

Under the city charter, the mayor has the option to suspend the sheriff for official misconduct. The charges would be considered at a hearing of the city's Ethics Commission, which would then make a recommendation to the Board of Supervisors.

Nine of 11 supervisors would have to approve the charges for Mirkarimi to be removed from office.

Judge James Collins ordered Mirkarimi to return on Thursday for an orientation meeting at the adult probation department. He will also be required to return to court on April 6 to prove he has enrolled for probation.

A stay-away order preventing Mirkarimi from contacting his wife, Eliana Lopez, will remain in effect until he begins his domestic violence counseling, Mirkarimi's defense attorney Lidia Stiglich said.

He will not be allowed to carry a firearm while that order is in place, Stiglich said.

She said Mirkarimi is already looking into his counseling options.

"He wants to get moving on his counseling, he's already looked into programs and we want to get that process moving," Stiglich said.

She added, "There's nothing about what occurred here that should call into question the bang-up job he's been doing as sheriff."

Prosecutors declined to comment on the sentencing outside of court. District Attorney George Gascón has planned a news conference for Monday afternoon to discuss the case.