On Tuesday, one day after a judge sentenced the sheriff to three years' probation for falsely imprisoning his wife, Mirkarimi announced he would not resign — despite a warning from San Francisco Mayor Ed Lee that failure to do so would result in the sheriff's possible ouster.

The declaration set off a battle between the sheriff, who, by his own admission, has "arrogance" and "anger issues," and the mayor, whom Mirkarimi described Tuesday as "collegial."

Both men were sworn in to their current offices on Jan. 8. Mirkarimi, whose 72 days as sheriff have been dominated by the headline-grabbing case, was a progressive standard-bearer who had previously served two terms on the Board of Supervisors. Lee, who was appointed as the city's first Asian-American mayor last year after former Mayor Gavin Newsom won statewide office, campaigned for his first full term on the promise of restoring civility to San Francisco politics.

%related%

Mirkarimi's decision to stand his ground marked the first major political test of Lee's new administration.

The mayor met with Mirkarimi Monday afternoon "to give him the opportunity to resign," Lee said during a brief and sober press conference at 5 p.m. Tuesday. "He has chosen not to resign, and now I must act," the mayor said.

Lee said he had initiated official misconduct proceedings against Mirkarimi, who will be served with charges and could be suspended as early as Wednesday.

The mayor named Vicki Hennessy to temporarily replace Mirkarimi. Hennessy joined the sheriff's department in 1975 and became the youngest captain in California law enforcement in 1983, according to the mayor's office. She was appointed to lead the city's Department of Emergency Management in 2008 and retired in 2011.

%139%

The city's Ethics Commission "will begin a process to make a recommendation to the Board of Supervisors" regarding Mirkarimi's charges within five days, Francis Tsang, a mayoral spokesman, said in a statement.

The Ethics Commission is composed of five members, four of whom are lawyers. The city attorney, district attorney, Board of Supervisors, assesor and mayor each appoint one member. The term of the mayor's pick, Beverly Hayon, was due to expire in February, but she is still listed as an active member on the commission's website.

According to the city charter, nine of the 11 city supervisors would have to approve the charges for Mirkarimi to be removed from office.

Mirkarimi's case will mark only the third time the city has dealt with official misconduct charges in the last four decades. In the most recent case, that of Supervisor Ed Jew, who faced criminal charges for lying about where he lived, the board held only one hearing before Jew resigned. He was eventually convicted of extorting money from business owners and not living in the district he was elected to represent.

In 1976, Mayor George Moscone suspended Joseph Mazzola, the business manager of a local plumbers union, from his position on the airport commission and filed official misconduct charges against him. Mazzola later won a lawsuit against the city in which he argued that his actions — supporting his union in a strike against the city — did not meet the definition of official misconduct in the city charter.

San Francisco voters broadened that definition in 1995 to include "any wrongful behavior by a public officer in relation to the duties of his or her office, willful in its character, including … conduct that falls below the standard of decency, good faith and right action impliedly required of all public officers."

The charter does not specify whether the misconduct must have occurred while the official was in his or her current office. Mirkarimi pleaded guilty to an incident that occurred while he was still a city supervisor.

Lee made reference to the standard of decency laid out in the city charter Tuesday when he stated that "Sheriff Mirkarimi's actions and confession of guilt clearly fall below" the high legal and ethical standards "required of all public officials."

"I take this action with every conviction that I am acting on a firm legal basis and doing what is in the best interest of the people of San Francisco," Lee said.

Mirkarimi, his face shiny with sweat, addressed the subject of official misconduct during a news conference Tuesday afternoon.

"I do not believe that the conduct that I have taken responsibility for constitutes official misconduct within the meaning of the law," he said. "I look forward to making my case to the Ethics Commission and the Board of Supervisors."

Embed:http://youtu.be/p7s9yDzMXvE

Mirkarimi pleaded guilty to misdemeanor false imprisonment last week after prosecutors agreed to drop three other misdemeanor charges against him, including domestic violence battery.

Tuesday's developments capped a wild day in a case that appeared to be nearing an end Monday morning with the sheriff's sentencing.

Mirkarimi tearfully apologized to his department, the city and his family after the sentencing.

"I deeply and humbly apologize for my behavior and the pain it caused to my wife and son, to my colleagues, to the San Francisco Sheriff's Department and to the people of San Francisco. For what happened on Dec. 31, there are no excuses and I accept full responsibility," Mirkarimi said.

But the city awoke Tuesday to a scathing op-ed piece by one of the sheriff's neighbors, Abraham Mertens, accusing Mirkarimi of "abhorrent behavior" and Lopez of pressuring a witness in the domestic violence case to destroy evidence.

Mertens is married to Ivory Madison, who, according to court documents, recorded video on Jan. 1 of Eliana Lopez revealing a bruise she claimed she received during an argument with the sheriff in front of their 2-year-old son on Dec. 31.

Madison contacted police about the Lopez's claims on Jan. 4, four days before Mirkarimi was sworn in as sheriff. Mirkarimi was booked into San Francisco County Jail, which he supervised as sheriff, on Jan. 12.

At a news conference Tuesday, Lopez's lawyer, Paula Canny, refuted Mertens' claims, saying that Lopez felt attacked and confused.

"She's about to have a nervous breakdown, as am I," Canny said.

Canny said her client "absolutely wants Ross to remain in office."

"I don't think they can properly remove Ross on the grounds they've cited," Canny said. "To the mayor, please respect the electoral process."

At his press conference, Mirkarimi said he and his wife "still have never told our story."

"I had been prepared for the last nine weeks for a very brutal process in a trail in the criminal courts for an administrative hearing," he said. "I feel we are even more prepared and have a stronger ability to present our case."