The mayor gave the sheriff the ultimatum during a Monday afternoon meeting that lasted approximately 15 minutes, the sources said.

Susan Fahey, a spokeswoman for the sheriff, said Mirkarimi "hasn't given me an indication one way or another" regarding whether he plans to step down.

Reporters waited for a decision from Mirkarimi outside of his office Tuesday afternoon.

News of the ultimatum came shortly before an attorney for Mirkarimi's wife, Eliana Lopez, held a press conference to respond to charges that Lopez repeatedly pressured two neighbors to "destroy evidence" against the sheriff and "lie to police."

The allegations were made by the couple's neighbor, Abraham Mertens, in an op-ed published in Tuesday's San Francisco Chronicle.

Lopez's lawyer, Paula Canny, refuted the claims, saying her client was "about to have a nervous breakdown, as am I." Lopez had planned to attend the noon press conference, but decided not to after the publication of the op-ed, Canny said.

In the article, Mertens called for Mirkarimi to "resign immediately" and urged San Francisco Mayor Ed Lee to remove Mirkarimi if he refuses to step down.

Lee said Tuesday morning that he would hold a news conference Tuesday afternoon to comment on the case.

When asked if he thought Mirkarimi should resign given Mertens' allegations, Lee said, "It's up to Ross to decide."

At her news conference Tuesday, Canny said, "I don't think they can properly remove Ross on the grounds they've cited."

"To the mayor, please respect the electoral process," she said.

Mertens is the husband of Ivory Madison, whom Lopez contacted on Jan. 1, the day after she and Mirkarimi allegedly had an argument that resulted in a bruise on Lopez's arm. Madison recorded video of Lopez discussing the argument and revealing the bruise, according to court documents. Madison also contacted police about the incident, initiating the investigation against Mirkarimi.

Mertens wrote that the last time he spoke to Lopez was on Jan. 4, the day Madison called police:

I recognized what I thought was Ross' voice in the background as Eliana pressured me to destroy evidence and lie to the police. Then she repeatedly called Ivory, demanding that Ivory destroy the video, e-mail and texts from Eliana about the incident.

When Mertens and Madison refused to comply, Mertens claimed that lawyers for Mirkarimi and Lopez "tried to silence my wife." Mertens, an attorney, took issue with the tactics used by Mirkarimi's defense team, which he said included subpoenaing the couple's phone records and correspondence. He wrote that Canny sent a letter to his wife demanding Madison not testify and "falsely claiming that she would be acting illegally if she did so."

Canny on Tuesday reiterated her assertion that Lopez believed Madison was acting as an attorney when the two women spoke, a claim she had used in court when arguing that the video was protected by attorney-client privilege and should not be admitted as evidence.

Canny said she was considering filing a lawsuit against Mertens and Madison for saying that Lopez acted illegally.

Mirkarimi pleaded guilty to a misdemeanor charge of false imprisonment last week, after prosecutors agreed to drop three other misdemeanor charges, including domestic violence battery. As part of the plea agreement, Mirkarimi was required to apologize to Madison. Mertens claimed that San Francisco District Attorney George Gascón "forced Ross to apologize" because his behavior was "so abhorrent."

Mertens said Mirkarimi made statements after he entered his plea "that indicate a total failure to understand that his wounds in this matter are self-inflicted and that he pleaded guilty to a crime."

Mertens wrote that he believes Mirkarimi "does not have the moral qualifications or commitment to law enforcement necessary to do the job."

He ended his editorial on a caustic note:

Ross says he wants to move on. So do we all — without him as sheriff. It's bad enough my family has to live next door to him.