San Francisco Mayor Ed Lee met with Sheriff Ross Mirkarimi Monday afternoon and may announce Tuesday whether he intends to start the process of removing the sheriff for official misconduct, Francis Tsang, a mayoral spokesman, told The Bay Citizen Monday.

Lee, who has been consulting with City Attorney Dennis Herrera, spoke with Mirkarimi about "what's best for San Francisco, whether or not the sheriff should remain sheriff," Tsang said. The mayor plans to make an announcement about the case on Tuesday, Tsang said.

Although Mirkarimi has repeatedly said that he would not step down, Tsang said, "I think the mayor just wanted to hear it from him."

After the meeting, which lasted approximately 15 minutes, Mirkarimi briskly walked out of a side door from the mayor's office on the second floor of City Hall and up the stairs to his office on the fourth floor. He told reporters who ran after him, "It'd be premature for me to talk."

On Monday morning, a judge sentenced Mirkarimi to three years' probation for falsely imprisoning his wife during an argument on Dec. 31. Shortly after the sentencing, the union representing sheriff's deputies expressed its dismay at the plea, and domestic violence advocates renewed their calls for Mirkarimi's ouster.

In a statement Monday afternoon, Don Wilson, the president of the San Francisco Deputy Sheriff's Association, said, "We are extremely disappointed any time a law enforcement officer pleads guilty of a crime."

In an interview, Wilson added, "Morale has been affected adversely and negatively and is very low. Deputies have expressed concerns about our sheriff going through this."

Mirkarimi pleaded guilty to one misdemeanor charge of false imprisonment last week after prosecutors agreed to drop three other misdemeanor charges against him, including domestic violence battery. At a news conference Monday afternoon, San Francisco District Attorney George Gascón said that false imprisonment "is a domestic violence charge."

Gascón said the plea deal provided Mirkarimi with "an opportunity to redeem himself with his family and his community."

After his sentencing Monday morning, Mirkarimi indicated he had no intention to step down from his office.

"I'm committed to becoming a better public servant, one you can be proud of," he said.

Mirkarimi said "the sheriff's department has been running right and well," but when asked whether he had the moral authority to remain as sheriff, he walked away without answering.

Wilson said Monday that Mirkarimi could not take credit for the department's successful functioning.

"The public should know that it's the deputy sheriffs, the rank and file, who have been doing a great job," he said. "We are the ones that work the jails and have to deal with these murderers and rapists and robbers. We're the ones who are on the front line."

%related%

Wilson said that Mirkarimi's guilty plea had raised questions in the department about the sheriff's role in disciplining deputies. "If one of our members faces disciplinary measures, he's the one who decides what those will be," he said.

In addition to three years' probation, Judge James Collins sentenced Mirkarimi to one day in the county jail that he, as sheriff, supervises.

But Mirkarimi received credit for time served and will not be spending any more time behind bars. He will have to attend 52 weeks of domestic violence classes, perform 100 hours of community service and pay a $400 domestic violence fine. He will also be required to attend family counseling.

Gascón said that Mirkarimi will not be allowed to carry a gun until a judge lifts a stay-away order barring him from having any contact with his wife, Eliana Lopez.

Collins ordered Mirkarimi to return on Thursday for a probation orientation meeting. The probation department works "extremely closely" with the sheriff's department, according to Wendy Still, San Francisco's chief probation officer.

After his sentencing hearing, a tearful Mirkarimi apologized to the his department, the city and his family.

"I deeply and humbly apologize for my behavior and the pain it caused to my wife and son, to my colleagues, to the San Francisco Sheriff's Department and to the people of San Francisco. For what happened on Dec. 31, there are no excuses and I accept full responsibility," Mirkarimi said.

"The very public reminder that I'm not the person that I thought I was provides for a dark world where my flaws stand bright. Some time ago I started counseling to address my arrogance and anger issues. I look forward to begin additional counseling that I will be receiving and the couples counseling my wife and I sought during this ordeal but was denied, and hoping that we'll eventually undergo."

Embed:http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=aFihimPoU1o

Gascón said that the sheriff's statements made him "feel comfortable that Mr. Mirkarimi has assumed responsibility for his acts." But Beverly Upton, executive director of the San Francisco Domestic Violence Consortium, said she was not sure whether Mirkarimi's comments Monday were "enough to show any type of real remorse."

"He's had 10 weeks to show that remorse," Upton said at the Monday afternoon news conference called by Gascón.

Upton called on San Francisco Mayor Ed Lee to begin the process of removing Mirkarimi from office: "I think the mayor has a very good heart, and I think he should gather his courage. I think he should start the ball rolling in removing Ross from office."

"A recall would cost a million dollars. Courage costs nothing," she said.

Under the city charter, the mayor has the option to suspend the sheriff for official misconduct. The charges would be considered at a hearing of the city's Ethics Commission, which would then make a recommendation to the Board of Supervisors.

Nine of 11 supervisors would have to approve the charges for Mirkarimi to be removed from office.

Gascón said prosecutors "had plenty of evidence to go proceed publicly with a trial and it would have been very embarrassing to Mr. Mirkarimi."

They chose not to go to trial because "our intent here was not political, nor was it intended to embarrass him. Our intent was to seek a just outcome," Gascón said.

Gascón thanked Ivory Madison and Callie Williams, two of Mirkarimi's neighbors who were on the prosecution's witness list, saying they acted with "great courage." Madison recorded a video on Jan. 1 of a tearful Lopez showing a bruise on her right arm that she claimed resulted from an argument with Mirkarimi on Dec. 31, according to court documents. Madison's phone call to police on Jan. 4 initiated the investigation against Mirkarimi.

Attorneys for Mirkarimi and Lopez lost several bids to have the video ruled inadmissible in court. Gascón said Monday that the video is back in the possession of the DA's office and will not be released to the public.

"Ms. Madison found herself in a difficult situation trying to protect a friend who was in danger. In a surprising and disappointing turn, she was vilified for her acts of courage," Gascón said. "I find this shameful."

Matt Smith and Bay City News Service contributed reporting.