Mayor Edwin M. Lee, who made affordable housing a key issue in his election campaign last fall, convened a series of meetings beginning in January to devise a plan for replacing tens of millions of dollars in housing subsidies that the city lost when Gov. Jerry Brown dissolved redevelopment agencies across the state last year.

For Lee, this issue is personal; he got his start in public life as a legal advocate for immigrant renters.

"Housing is one of his top priorities," said Christine Falvey, Lee's spokeswoman. "He campaigned on it, and now he has worked very successfully in his first year as mayor in bringing different people together to shape a policy." She added, "A policy that has broad support."

But with a May objective for producing ballot measures to raise money for new housing subsidies, Lee's Housing Trust Fund Work Group seems to have served mainly to demonstrate that, while everybody purports to oppose high rents in this city, they cannot agree on how to solve the problem.

The people Lee has gathered for his Trust Fund Work Group represent some of San Francisco's most fiercely oppositional interest groups. They include nonprofit developers, builders of high-rise condominium buildings, builders of small apartment buildings, managers of city-subsidized housing complexes, and smart-growth environmental advocates.

Although the group has not reached consensus on how to come up with more housing subsidies, one thing is clear: With the recession, budget cuts and downturns in local construction and real estate industries, there may be so many interests competing for pieces of a potential housing trust fund that they could undermine plans to pass a ballot measure to pay for it.

"You can't say 'let's carve out housing' and expect it's going to be a simple thing," said Peter Cohen, co-director of the Council of Community Housing Organizations, which lobbies on behalf of nonprofit housing developers. "There are union contracts. We're entering into the budget season. There are people raising concerns about employees. There's tension. The city's general fund is not big enough for everything."

The simple solution — asking voters to approve new taxes earmarked for subsidized housing — is viewed as impractical in the current political climate, because specific-use taxes require two-thirds approval. So the participants in the mayor's Housing Trust Fund Work Group are considering, among other ideas, a strategy to raise tens of millions of dollars in annual housing subsidies — first through a ballot initiative to increase taxes on the sale of existing properties, and then by passing a second ballot initiative that would allocate those revenues specifically to subsidize housing costs for lower-income residents.

In 2008, and again in 2010, city leaders floated the idea of raising taxes to pay for more housing subsidies. In both instances, tax increases passed at the ballot box, but plans to earmark the money for housing foundered. The money went into the city's general fund, where it was pounced upon by a variety of other interests.

Like most cities, San Francisco has been hurt by the recession. Job growth has long outpaced the number of housing units being built, and an economic recovery will only worsen the imbalance.

According to California's Employment Development Department, the counties of Marin, San Mateo and San Francisco hosted 952,100 jobs. Meanwhile, the 2010 U.S. Census counted just 659,187 housing units in those three counties.

During the 1990s and 2000s San Francisco permitted about one-third of the housing units that would have been required to keep pace with population growth, according to the city's Planning Department. And the Association of Bay Area Governments predicts that by 2030 the Bay Area will add 1.4 million jobs, yet will add only 605,000 new housing units.

%related%

As a result, at the end of 2011 an average two-bedroom apartment in San Francisco rented for $3,267 per month, up from $2,840 a year earlier, according to the real estate services firm Cassidy Turley. In March, the National Low Income Housing Coalition, an advocacy group, proclaimed San Francisco to be America's costliest city for rentals.

Building enough housing to meet demand is politically difficult in a city whose population density is the highest in the western United States. Further complicating matters is the city's tradition of community activism. The Planning Department has counted more than 400 neighborhood organizations and related groups, many formed over the years to battle against housing project proposals that came and went. The city must usually negotiate with these groups when new construction is proposed.

So, politically, the trick for San Francisco politicians has been to favor reduced rents without actually proposing to build enough new apartments to meet demand. As a result, political discussions about housing tend to focus on low-income housing subsidies.

The city's realtors have already circulated flyers objecting to the idea of a new tax on property sales, called a transfer tax.

San Francisco Supervisor Scott Wiener has proposed routing more subsidies toward middle-income residents, which in San Francisco can mean people earning $90,000 per year.

Randy Shaw, executive director of the nonprofit Tenderloin Housing Clinic, said he backs the mayor's plan to raise money for new subsidized housing. But Shaw said he believes around $7 million of the money should go toward raises for staff members of nonprofit housing agencies, including his 300 or so employees. "There really is enough money there," Shaw said. "We need to look at housing, but along with other priorities."

Many of the city's labor unions, meanwhile, are in contract negotiations and are seeking more money from the city's general fund, the same source of money that housing advocates hope to tap.

Sean Keighran, president of the Residential Builders Association, a local construction trade association, said he favors new housing subsidies but would like to see an end to local rules that require his members to pay for subsidized units in every building they make. "The industry needs some relief," Keighran said. "Unemployment is 30 percent in construction."

S. Osborn Erickson, chairman of the Emerald Fund, a local developer, said any deal involving a transfer tax increase must include an easing of a city requirement that 15 percent of the units in any apartment project be subsidized by the developer to make them affordable to lower-income tenants. The key to reducing rents, Erickson said, is encouraging market-rate housing construction.

"If you're just going to raise the transfer tax, that just makes it more difficult overall to provide housing," he said. "If, however, it's coupled with reducing affordable requirements, that's a way to do it where everybody wins."

Cohen, whose organization's members have sometimes supported neighborhood-improvement groups in opposing market-rate housing projects, countered that the city should allow developers to build apartments only after the city has extracted the maximum possible fees to pay for subsidized units.

Shaw, who says any deal must set aside millions for his workers, said he does not believe the mayor will allow the Trust Fund discussions to be held hostage by any one faction. "This is not going to happen here because the mayor won't tolerate it," he said. "And that's why I'm confident of a positive result here."

This article also appears in the Bay Area edition of The New York Times.