Instead of disbanding the district, which takes in about $240,000 in tax revenue each year, local watchdog officials voted Wednesday to put the City of Concord in charge of its management.

Last week, The Bay Citizen reported that Mt. Diablo is one of about 30 health care districts — out of 74 statewide — that continue to collect taxes even though they no longer run hospitals. The districts were originally created to provide hospital care to rural and low-income areas.

Mary Piepho, a member of the Contra Costa Local Agency Formation Commission, told the crowd at a meeting Wednesday that dissolving the Mt. Diablo Health Care District was "fraught with risk," while reorganizing it was a "cautious, but maybe more prudent approach."

Until this year, state law required voter approval for the dissolution of special districts. But new legislation, which took effect in January, made it easier to disband most special districts without an election.

There is debate about whether voter approval is required to dissolve health care districts under the new law, said Kate McKenna, executive officer of the Monterey LAFCO, and a former deputy executive officer of the California Association of Local Agency Formation Commissions, which represents the state's 58 commissions.

If the Contra Costa LAFCO had voted for dissolution, the Mt. Diablo Health Care District threatened to sue to put the issue on the ballot. Members of LAFCO indicated that they feared that such a suit could be costly and take years to resolve.

After urging the commission to dissolve the district, Concord officials agreed to submit an application outlining how the district's day-to-day operations would be overseen by the City Council. The takeover could be finalized by the end of the year, pending the commission's approval.

The district has long been criticized for poor management and waste. Over the last decade, four grand jury reports have called for its dissolution. The small district, which includes Concord, Martinez, Pleasant Hill and parts of Lafayette, has not run a hospital since 1996, yet continues to take in about $240,000 in property tax revenues a year.

%related%

From 2000 through 2007, the district spent only a fraction of its budget on community health programs, financial reports show. Between 2000 and 2011, the district spent just 17 percent — $527,686 — of its $3.2 million in property tax and other revenue on community grants, public records show. The bulk of its budget goes to administrative and overhead expenses.

For example, in 2012, the district expects to spend about $16,000, or about 7 percent of the tax revenue it receives, on health insurance for a current board member, a former board member and their spouses. It also owes as much as $800,000 for lifetime retiree health benefits for a current and a former board member.

Critics of government spending seized on the district's inefficiencies at the meeting Wednesday.

"This group has squandered hundreds of thousands of dollars," said Kris Hunt, executive director of the Contra Costa Taxpayers Association. "Four grand juries came to the conclusion that this district should be dissolved. We agree."

District officials pleaded for patience.

"There is no public need or benefit for the dissolution of the Mt. Diablo Health Care District," said Jeff Kasper, chairman of the district's board, who urged the commission to grant the district another year to address its shortcomings.

"You've had the one year many times," responded Commissioner Dwight Meadows. "How many times do we give one more year?"

If the reorganization plan is approved, the Concord City Council would serve as the governing board of the district. After the meeting, Daymon Doss, the district's executive director, said it would continue to do its best to address residents' the health care needs.

"We are going to continue to do business," Doss said. "It may have a very different future, but it will have a future."