The question of how Olsen was injured, and by whom, has been the subject of intense speculation and an ongoing police department investigation.

Mark Martel, Olsen's attorney, said the Oakland Police Department had given him the information a couple of weeks ago, but had not stated explicitly whether it was an Oakland police officer who fired the round.

Olsen was hit during a confrontation between officers and demonstrators on Oct. 25, hours after officers removed the Occupy Oakland encampment from the plaza in front of Oakland's City Hall. The department requested help from at least 17 other law enforcement agencies to evict the camp and respond to the protest that followed.

Oakland police have acknowledged using beanbag bullets and tear gas to disperse protesters that night.

Sgt. Chris Bolton, the Oakland Police Department's chief of staff, said he could not confirm what type of munition struck Olsen because the department's investigation into the incident is still open.

"Obviously in an investigation into Scott Olsen, one of the core questions to be asked is, 'What hit him in the head, and who caused an object to hit him in the head?'" Bolton said.

%related%

Olsen had previously said he believed he had been hit with a tear gas canister.

"The difference is significant, because a tear gas canister, you don't shoot at a person," said Martel, who called the development "troubling" and said he planned to file a lawsuit against the city and the police department.

"It looks like one officer intentionally shot him," he said.

The Oakland Police Department is currently conducting an internal investigation into the police response to Occupy protests on Oct. 25 and Nov. 2. The city of Oakland is conducting a separate investigation simultaneously, led by Thomas Frazier, a former Baltimore police commissioner and former deputy chief in San Jose. Court-appointed monitors who oversee the police department are also conducting a review of the department's response to Occupy Oakland.

The Oakland Police Department has assembled a full-time team of at least three investigators to deal specifically with complaints related to Occupy Oakland, Bolton said. The members were pulled from elsewhere within the department, including the communications and criminal investigations divisions, he said, but "typically not from patrol."

The department is reviewing video footage captured by television cameras, personal cameras and cell phones, and police officers' lapel cameras. One widely viewed video taken by news reporter Ali Winston shows people carrying Olsen, who is bleeding from the head. The people tell Winston that Olsen was shot.

Embed:http://www.youtube.com/watch?feature=player_embedded&v=cMUgPTCgwcQ

Another video taken by KTVU shows Olsen lying on the ground, surrounded by protesters, when an officer lobs an object into the group, releasing smoke.

Martel said he planned to file claim forms with the city of Oakland this week, the precursor to the lawsuit.

The claim will list the damages Olsen experienced as a result of his injury, including about $200,000 in medical bills, many of which are covered by insurance; violation of constitutional rights; pain and suffering; and lost income. Olsen recently lost his job at an information technology company because he was not able to work full-time, Martel said.

Martel said he expects to file the lawsuit within the next month.

Meanwhile, Olsen is experiencing memory problems and his speech is still "not normal," Martel said.

"He's a tough kid, he keeps a good state of mind," Martel said. "I think he's somewhat of a stoic. He's not a whiner."