The settlement, which was formally filed in court this week, gives Bank of America, Wells Fargo, JP Morgan Chase, Citibank and Ally Financial three years to deliever mortgage relief to troubled borrowers — with no penalties or fines to be assessed for noncompliance until 2015.

Instead, Harris' office said, the agreement relies on carrots rather than sticks to speed the pace of relief.

"Built into this agreement are incentives for lenders to write down the balances of struggling homeowners' mortgages within the next 12 months," said Shum Preston, a spokesman for Harris.

Under the terms of the deal, banks can take credit for more assistance than they actually provide if they meet certain targets.

For example, if Bank of America writes down $100,000 of the principal on a mortgage on an Oakland home during the coming year, the bank can claim credit for $115,000 in mortgage relief. That credit would rise to $125,000 if the home were in Vallejo, as Solano County falls on a list of the state's hardest-hit counties. (No other Bay Area county is on the list.)

%related%

California's $18 billion deal, which includes $12 billion in write-downs for homeowners who owe more on their home than the property is worth, is part of a national settlement reached among the banks, the Obama administration and the attorneys general of 49 states.

Loans owned by Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are not covered by the settlement. Together, the two government-controlled companies own more than 60 percent of California mortgages.

According to a national website set up by the state attorneys general to help consumers navigate the settlement, it will take six to nine months to "work to identify homeowners eligible for the immediate cash payments, principal reductions and refinancing."

Only three of the the banks — Bank of America, Wells Fargo and JP Morgan Chase — made a specific committment to help California borrowers as part of the settlement.

Bank of America agreed to provide $8.1 billion in principal reduction to California borrowers, while Wells Fargo and JP Morgan Chase each promised to provide $1.95 billion in write-downs.

In an interview, Sasha Werblin, who follows banking for the Berkeley-based Greenlining Insitute, a nonprofit advocacy group, said she was "shocked" that Citibank had been allowed to sign on to the deal without making a specific committment to California homeowners.

"They have a large presence here and need to be held accountable," she said.

Even so, consumer advocates said they were encouraged by what they read in the fine print of the settlement. If the banks have not provided mortage write-downs equal to their committments after three years, they will be fined $1.25 for every dollar of relief they failed to deliver. In addition, the banks could be forced to pay up to $800 million in fines to the California attorney general.

"It's certainly better than what we've seen in the past," said Kevin Stein, associate director of the California Reinvestment Coalition, a nonprofit advocacy group.

"We've become so used to seing no penalties at all," he said.