These days, however, it seems like the entire Bay Area has been struck with pickle cravings. Pickles are popping up in sandwiches and salads, or on pickle platters—even at fine-dining restaurants, which have launched sophisticated "pickling programs" that reach far beyond the classic cucumber pickle to include all sorts of vegetables and even fruits.

Originally, pickling began as a way to preserve food: submerging food in salty brine or vinegar, produces chemical reactions that kill off dangerous bacteria, while encouraging other, beneficial bacteria. It's kind of counter-intuitive, but it works.

Food historians speculate that pickling began in India four thousand years ago, as an important means of accessing produce, even when they were out of season. Before refrigeration, pickles were often the only source of important nutrients during lean times or long journeys.

In fact, without pickles, Europeans might never have made it to America. In the fifteenth century, sailors regularly fell victim to scurvy, or vitamin C deficiency, on long journeys because they lacked access to fresh produce. But Columbus's ships were packed full of C-rich pickles, which allowed the crews of the Nina, Pinta, and Santa Maria to survive all the way across the Atlantic Ocean.

The man who stocked those ships, Amerigo Vespucci, eventually lent his name to the continent where they landed — so, in a sense, "American" just means "pickle-ish."

Since then, America has continued to enjoy pickles from all over the world, from English gherkins and French cornichons to Japanese tsukemono and Korean kimchi, though the ethic cuisine most closely associated with pickles is probably that of the Jewish deli. In addition to barrels of sour and half-sour cucumber pickles, the classic deli also offers pickled meats, like pastrami and corned beef, which get their flavor from soaking in brine, like other pickles.

Last month, Wise Sons Deli opened in the Mission District of San Francisco, bringing an old-fashioned Jewish deli to a neighborhood better known for taquerias. This is good news for pickles.

"We'll pickle anything," said co-owner Evan Bloom, "With a new restaurant, we won't know how much we're going to sell, so all the extra vegetables will get pickled—that's how pickling got started."

Head Pickler Joe Wolf is excited to incorporate seasonally available vegetables into the Wise Sons pickle plate. While sauerkraut and cucumber pickles will always be on the menu, Wolf will also make pickles from turnips, radishes, beets, Brussels sprouts, broccoli de ciccio, fennel, watermelon rind, and even green tomatoes.

As Wise Sons has evolved from a pop-up restaurant to a weekly Ferry Building vendor to a brick-and-mortar deli with a line out the door, the pickling process has evolved as well. Wolf notes that scaling up from the small batches he used to make has been a learning process, because pickling is more of an art than a science.

"It's alive," Wolf said. "Small, tiny things can change the outcome. It's really cool to work with a product like that, because I'm always at the edge of my seat. It's why we work in kitchens—to learn, to be inspired."

Nick Balla would surely agree that pickles are exciting for cooks. He can get pretty animated talking about the pickles he's making as chef of Bar Tartine, in San Francisco, from parsnips with goat's whey to beet-pickled cauliflower.

On a tour of Bar Tartine's pickle-stocked shelves, Balla pointed out the "way-pickled ramp bulbs from last year," noting that "it takes a long time for them to mellow out, since they have a really overpowering allium flavor." For Balla, "It's fun to serve something as it comes back into season – 'fun' in a nerdy-cook sort of way."

Since taking over as chef of Bar Tartine about a year ago, Balla has steered the menu toward Hungarian food, which is part of his personal background, though his prior experience as a chef was primarily in Japanese restaurants. Both Hungarian and Japanese cuisines have rich and varied pickling traditions, but Balla noted that European pickles tend to have much more vinegar, while Japanese tsukemono (literally "pickled things") retain a stronger vegetal flavor.

In any case, Balla said, "We don't follow traditional recipes. We like spices, so we're just going to use them." One batch of fermented cabbage, for example, is pickled in a chili paste made from homemade paprika, anchovies, and smoked dried tomatoes; nearby, curried butternut squash is fermenting in a brine made with fresh turmeric, garlic, chili, and coriander.

For Cortney Burns, who is Project Manager at Bar Tartine and another pickle enthusiast, "The best thing about fermented vegetables is the probiotic quality. You can get a full spectrum of probiotics from sauerkraut and other vegetables, for a healthy gut flora." Could probiotics be why the Bay Area has gone crazy for pickles? Are we all responding to an unconscious nutritional need for good bacteria, like pregnant women following the siren song of salt?

For what it's worth: in the process of researching this article, I went ahead and made myself a bowl of chocolate-peanut butter ice cream with dill pickles, and it was delicious. Granted, I'm eight months pregnant, but I recommend it whole-heartedly in this, the final installment of the Active Ingredient column. (At least until I recover my normal appetite.) Thanks for reading.

***Active Ingredient Recipe***

Pickles

Pickling is often a matter of personal taste and adjustment, rather than strict recipes. Wise Sons pickler Josh Wolf offered these guidelines for making old-fashioned dill pickles, but please be advised that these are not hard-and-fast rules.

Salt

Pickling Cucumbers

Ice

Dill

Garlic

Cloves

Other spices to taste

Dissolve salt in warm water. For half-sour pickles, aim for 4-6% salinity. (That is, a saltwater mixture in which roughly 1/20 of the weight comes from salt.) Let the saltwater cool.

Remove the blossom ends of the cucumbers thoroughly, because they harbor bacteria, and scrape off any residual schmutz (i.e. unidentified dirty stuff) elsewhere on the cucumber.

Old-fashioned pickle barrels were made of oak, but these days, people use NSF Type 2 plastic, which is safe for food storage and can stand up to the acidity of pickles. If you're making a lot of pickles, Husky makes a trash barrel from NSF Type 2 plastic, which works well. Place pickles in the container with fresh dill, garlic, cloves, and any other spices you want.

If necessary, cool the saltwater brine with ice. The cooler the brine, the crunchier the pickle. You can keep cold, concentrated saltwater on hand to balance the salinity of the brine. Refractometers to measure salinity are available for as little as $25 online.

Weigh the cucumbers down to insure that they are submerged in the brine. It's a good idea to weight them with a bag of brine, in case of any spills.

For half-sour pickles, leave your cucumbers to ferment in brine for about seven days, optimally at 57-62 degrees Fahrenheit.  For full-sour pickles, you'll need to wait about 21 days. Once you've reached the desired level of sourness, move the pickles to a refrigerator, where the lower temperature will slow the fermentation, though the pickles will not last indefinitely (unless they're sealed up). Enjoy!