Those discussions became more intense over the weekend, after the San Francisco Superior Court's Appellate Division ruled on Friday that jurors could see a video of Mirkarimi's wife, Eliana Lopez, revealing a bruise that she claimed resulted from an argument with her husband on Dec. 31.

The ruling was the latest in a series of setbacks for the legal teams representing Mirkarimi and his wife, who had made several different attempts to persuade judges to exclude the video and other evidence or dismiss the case entirely.

On Sunday night, Mirkarimi and his attorneys finalized the details of the plea agreement. He would plead guilty to one misdemeanor charge of false imprisonment; in exchange, prosecutors would dismiss three misdeameanor charges  — domestic violence battery, child endangerment and dissuading a witness — that could have resulted in a one-year jail sentence.

%related%

On Monday morning, as prospective jurors waited to be interviewed by prosecutors and defense attorneys in the case, Mirkarimi entered his plea in in San Francisco's Superior Court.

When the judge asked him if anyone threatened or pressured him to make a plea, Mirkarimi paused for a few moments, before shaking his head and quietly saying "no."

"People who know Ross intimately say that he copped a plea because he and his lawyer believed, after several rulings that they believe they argued better than the DA and still lost, that they could not get a fair shake," a close friend of Mirkarimi's told The Bay Citizen.

In an interview with The Bay Citizen, Mirkarimi's attorney, Lidia Stiglich, said, "Do I think in light of some of the rulings the road ahead was difficult? Absolutely."

Financial concerns were also a factor in the sheriff's decision to plead guilty. Jury selection, which the trial judge had predicted would last only a few days, had gone on for more than two weeks and included more than 400 jurors.

"Money is also a part of it," former San Francisco Mayor Art Agnos said in an interview. "The DA has dozens of lawyers on salary. A defendant has to hire them by the hour." Mirkarimi rented a room in Agnos' home after a judge barred the sheriff from having any contact with his wife.

Stiglich said the conclusion of the trial "could have been months away."

Paula Canny, one of Lopez's attorneys, said her client had known that a plea deal was possible "for a couple of days and her reaction was that a deal could be reached that would enable her husband to hopefully keep his job as sheriff."

Canny said that Mirkarimi is Lopez's "sole source of income right now."

Canny called Mirkarimi's agreement "a classic plea bargain" and said the benefit of a false imprisonment charge "is that it doesn't carry a 10-year mandatory firearm prohibition," a ban that could have effectively ended his career in law enforcement.

Mirkarimi refused to step down after his arrest, but his decision to plead guilty Monday raised new questions about whether he could continue in his role as sheriff.

According to the city charter, the mayor has the authority to remove the sheriff on official misconduct grounds, with the approval of the city's ethics commission and Board of Supervisors, and appoint a replacement.

"The Sheriff, one of our top law enforcement officials, has now pleaded guilty to an unexpected and very serious charge that has introduced a new set of legal issues that must be thoroughly reviewed," San Francisco Mayor Ed Lee said in a statement.

"I am working with legal counsel to review the facts and determine what options are available to me under the City charter," Lee said, vowing to "make a decision based on all of the facts as quickly as possible."

The city attorney and several members of the Board of Supervisors declined to comment on the case.

After the court proceedings, Mirkarimi read a statement to reporters.

"For the last two months this case has cause my family, my department, the sheriff's department and the city great turmoil, pain and disappointment. This plea allows us to move forward," the sheriff said.

Under the terms of the plea agreement, Mirkarimi will be sentenced to three years' probation and will have to serve 100 hours of community service. In addition, he will be required to attend 52 weeks of domestic violence prevention classes and pay a $400 fine. He may also have to take parenting classes, if the probation department deems them necessary.

In a statement, George Gascón, the San Francisco district attorney and one of Mirkarimi's political rivals, said, "An appropriate response to domestic violence is essential if any effect is to be had on those who abuse, those who are abused and the children who witness abuse."

"I am confident today's plea and mandated counseling will help this family," Gascón said.

A court order barring Mirkarimi from having any contact with his wife remains in effect. When asked how long the court would take to lift the stay-away order, Superior Court spokeswoman Ann Donlan said that "in a typical case, it can take a few months."