Residents are working to transform the dead park, a symbol of the neighborhood's struggles with drug violence, into an inviting new entrance to their community.

For now, a fence obscures the park's neglected grounds from view.

Tyrone Carney Park sits near the corner of 105th and Edes Avenues, where young men loiter on the sidewalk outside a liquor store. It is at the entrance to Sobrante Park, a low-income residential neighborhood where more than 850 children live. None of them play at Tyrone Carney Park.

The City of Oakland closed the park almost a decade ago, fencing it off in November 2002, shortly after a drug-related shooting there left one man dead and three others wounded.

"The community asked that it be closed because we had five homicides that were at the park or on the sidewalks outside the park," said Oakland City Council President Larry Reid, who represents the area.

"Since the park has been closed," he said, "we've had one."

Local community groups are working to reclaim the blighted area.

"Nobody wants to come through an area that looks like a war zone where things are boarded up," said Cynthia Arrington, 60, co-chairwoman of the Sobrante Park Resident Action Council and the Neighborhood Crime Prevention Council.

After many community meetings, plans have been agreed upon to convert Tyrone Carney Park — named for a Marine from the neighborhood who was killed in the Vietnam War — into a landscaped gateway to the neighborhood.

With the traffic flowing around it, the new entrance to the neighborhood would include a welcome sign and a memorial to Carney, but no picnic tables, park benches or playground equipment.

"By redesigning from a park to a plaza, the goal was to optimize the safety, the security and the public access," said Kristine Shaff, a spokeswoman for the Oakland Public Works Agency.

Some remain skeptical that the project can achieve that goal.

"Unless they fence it in, there's going to be guys hanging out there anyway," said Don Neuwirth, program manager of the Oakland Schoolyard Initiative, a partnership between nonprofit groups and the Oakland Unified School District, which will be revamping the local elementary school yard this summer.

Construction documents for the new entrance to Sobrante Park are scheduled to be finished this summer at a cost of $200,000. But there is no money yet to actually do the project, which would cost just over $2 million.

"We're at the stage now where we can't break ground because Jerry Brown has taken away the redevelopment money,"  Arrington said.

Mr. Reid and community members are seeking money for the project from foundations, and will also solicit state and federal agencies.

The neighborhood does have another public park, which is still open, next to Sobrante Park Elementary. Yet on a recent sunny Monday afternoon, there were no children playing on the playground equipment there, which members of the Border Brothers gang have tagged with spray paint.

Three Latina mothers waiting for their children at Sobrante Park Elementary next door said in Spanish that they did not allow their children to play at that park, because it was unsafe. Instead, their children play in the schoolyard or at home.

Many of the houses in the neighborhood have fenced front yards.

"It's like a vicious circle where because the parks are perceived to be dangerous, they become occupied by people doing bad things, so there's no place for kids to play," Mr. Neuwirth said.

Last month, Victoria Figg, a resident of the neighborhood for 42 years, started a monthly "community play date" at the elementary school yard. That meant opening it for three hours on Saturday afternoons to give local children an opportunity to play together in a safe outdoor environment on the weekend.

Eighteen families, including 35 children, took part in the free event in February. The children rode scooters, skateboards and bikes. They played basketball with local firefighters. There was a singalong.

"It's just bringing the community back together,"  Figg said.

This article also appears in the Bay Area edition of The New York Times.