The recommended overhaul of the nine-county energy network, dubbed Bay Area Smart Energy 2020 (BASE 2020), aims to displace all of Pacific Gas & Electric's coal power and a portion of its natural gas electricity through the expansion of renewable or alternative sources, such as rooftop solar panels, increased geothermal output in Sonoma County, biomethane plants, and wind projects in Solano County.

Under  the proposal, demand among Bay Area properties for energy from PG&E  and local utilities would drop by 50 percent. The shift would eliminate an estimated 12 million tons of CO2 from  entering the air and transform 25 percent of Bay Area homes and  businesses into "zeo net energy" buildings, which produce at least as  much power as they use.

The  plan would require wide-reaching cooperation and policy changes and is circulating among  state and local lawmakers and regulatory  agencies.

"It  wasn't just a big academic exercise for the sake of it. We actually put  it in a regulatory language,"  said Rory Cox, Pacific Environment  senior energy consultant and executive editor of the report. "In  terms of the people who can really make the rubber hit the road, it is  really the regulatory community. We really wanted to put it into a  format that will resonate with them and will give them the necessary  detail to make programs and projects happen."

A financing program known as Property Assessed Clean Energy (PACE), in which cities or private investors provide up-front cash to property owners for energy upgrades that is then repaid through property taxes, could bankroll many of the recommendations. First established in Berkeley, the mechanism has worked succesfully in Sonoma County since 2009, according to the report. San Francisco began its commercial PACE program, GreenFinanceSF-Commercial, in October of last year.

The proposal also suggests that counties create their own energy authority, a Community Choice Aggregation, to purchase electricity directly from renewable sources. Marin Energy Authority began its Marin Clean Energy program in 2010. PG&E delivers and services the orders, but residents can opt for different rates of sustainably sourced power.

The  report is largely critical of the California energy giant, deriding  many of its current projects and describing it as unfit to lead substantive energy reform.

"PG&E  is not the ideal entity to lead the effort to achieve the ambitious  zero net energy goals in the Energy Efficiency Strategic Plan and BASE  2020," the report reads.

It condemns PG&E's plans to build four new natural gas-fired plants in the East Bay that would produce 2,000 megawatts of power and cost ratepayers approximately $600 million per year for 20 years. The author claims the  company produces 30 to 40 percent more energy than is already demanded, and stagnation in recent years does not warrant additional energy output.

"One of the arguments to build a natural gas plant is to back up renewables," Cox said. "That's a justification, but it's a misleading one. We already have baseload power. We have overcapacity." Even PG&E's renewable projects do not escape criticism. The report cites figures from California Public Utilities Commission that suggest investor-owned public utilities companies will spend spend  an additional $6 billion above market rate on renewable energy contracts the companies signed through summer 2010.  The author emphasizes that many more expensive contracts have been signed and approved since then. PG&E's recently approved 250 megawatt solar thermal array in the Mojave Desert is set to exceed market rate by $1.25 billion and should produce double the energy for that price, according to a dissenting commissioner of CPUC who voted against the contract.

The report explains that remote projects hundreds of miles away from delivery sites often involve expensive construction or rewiring of "transmission lines" that could cost more than $15 billion statewide if investor-owned utilities continue to pursue these types of projects. The author suggests that rooftop solar arrays on large commerical buildings in urban areas are more cost-effective. "A large ground-mounted PV array in the Mojave or Colorado Desert produces electricity at an all-in cost, including the cost of new transmission, as much as 50 percent greater than the cost-of-electricity produced by a 500 kilowatt PV array on a big box retail outlet or similar large commercial building in Oakland," the author writes.