Scientists have discovered that the chorus frogs carry a vicious fungus disease as they move around in search of food, mates and habitat.

The fungus Batrachochytrium dendrobatidis, dubbed chytrid, is highly lethal to amphibian species around the globe — more than 200 extinctions have been attributed to its crippling effects since the disease was discovered in the late 1990s — but not to the chorus frogs themselves.

Researchers from San Francisco State University and the research arm of the San Diego Zoo reported Monday in the online journal PLoS ONE that Pacific chorus frogs were found riddled with the disease without being affected by it.

"I was definitely surprised at the high levels of infection that we found in the chorus frogs," said Natalie Reeder, the lead author of the study who spent two years collecting and analyzing different species of infected and uninfected frogs from Kings Canyon National Park as part of a masters project.

%related%

Vance Vredenburg, a San Francisco State University biology professor and one of the report authors, said the discovery could explain a rapid spread of the disease through the Sierra Nevada, where it is pushing vulnerable mountain yellow-legged frogs to the brink of extinction.

Pacific chorus frogs travel widely and flourish in a wide range of habitats, sometimes miles away from lakes or rivers, and they are found from Baja California in Mexico to British Columbia in Canada.

"Those species that overlap with it had better watch out," Vredenburg said. "We found a species that is really dangerous. It's like when you're crammed on a BART train and you see someone sneeze and they don't put their hand over their mouth."

The mountain yellow-legged frog populations have been so badly decimated by the fungus disease that the California Fish and Game Commission this year listed them as an endangered species, noting a decline in their numbers of more than 90 percent.

The new findings about chytrid and chorus frogs are being shared with government wildlife officials in a bid to help protect yellow-legged frogs and other species from the disease, according to Vredenburg.

"There's literally a handful of [yellow-legged frog] populations that haven't been infected yet," Vredenburg said. "Let's get out there and check them right away."

Vredenburg said a type of bacteria growing on the skin of the chorus frogs could be protecting the amphibians from the disease's fatal effects, and that the bacteria might one day be used to treat affected species.

The yellow-legged frogs once dined upon the Pacific chorus frogs, but prey has unwittingly become predator. By spreading the disease to other species, the chorus frogs could be expanding their range.

"These guys are taking over in places where they were excluded," Vredenburg said. "There's a lot of competition for food and resources."