HIGH HOPES

The Summit, which was completed in 1965 and designed by Tibor Fecskes,  was briefly the tallest building in San Francisco with 31 stories, including 6 floors of parking. Eichler lived in one of the two penthouses. Now conjoined, the top floor is owned by George Shultz, the former secretary of State, and his wife, Charlotte Mailliard Shultz, the city's director of protocol.

%13135%

SHAPELY AND STATELY

Most tall buildings taper inward as they rise, but from the 24th floor and above, the Summit flares outward, with each floor one foot beyond the floor below.

NO SMALL THING

Between 1949 and 1974, about 10,500 Eichler homes were built in Northern California. An enclave of about 100 are perched in the Diamond Heights neighborhood in San Francisco, and 185 cluster on a Castro Valley ridge. There are Eichlers in Marin, Concord and San Mateo. In Walnut Creek there is a mini-Eichler, smaller than 500 square feet.

EQUAL OPPORTUNITY

Eichler's houses were a design product of their time, the "Mad Men" era. The details include floor-to-ceiling windows, radiant floor heating and central atria. Eichler was one of the first developers to open his subdivisions to minority residents. In the mid-1950s, after a black couple bought into a Marin development, neighbors complained and asked Eichler to block the sale. He refused.

AN EICHLER AND A LIKELER

It was widely reported that the childhood home of Steve Jobs, Apple's co-founder, was an Eichler, but that midcentury house in Mountain View was determined to be an Eichler competitor — what Eichler fans call a "likeler." Steve Wozniak, Apple's other founder, grew up in an Eichler in Sunnyvale.

HIGH, NOT MIGHTY

Locally, Eichler single-family homes are priced from $500,000 to over $2 million; a Summit condominium recently sold for $2.2 million. Eichler's son, Ned, 81, said building the Summit and other high-rises had contributed to the company's 1967 bankruptcy.

A TOUCH OF CLASS

Eichlers appealed to those with "upper-middle-class taste but lower-middle-class incomes," joked the developer's son, who lives in Marin and prefers less modern architecture. "We had no idea the style would last," he said.

This article also appears in the Bay Area edition of The New York Times.