Under the terms of the deal, the sheriff will not spend any time in jail.

San Francisco Mayor Ed Lee called the plea "serious and troubling for our City," owing to "the Sheriff's role in overseeing and incarcerating criminals in our county jails."

"The Sheriff, one of our top law enforcement officials, has now pleaded guilty to an unexpected and very serious charge that has introduced a new set of legal issues that must be thoroughly reviewed," Lee said in a statement.

"I am working with legal counsel to review the facts and determine what options are available to me under the City charter," he said, vowing to "make a decision based on all of the facts as quickly as possible."

Mirkarimi entered his guilty plea as prospective jurors in his upcoming domestic violence trial were scheduled to answer questions from prosecutors and his attorneys.

Mirkarimi was facing trial on three misdemeanor charges of domestic violence battery, child endangerment, and dissuading a witness stemming from an incident in which he allegedly bruised his wife, Eliana Lopez, during an argument in front of their child. Prosecutors added the fourth charge of false imprisonment Monday and dropped the three original charges, in exchange for his guilty plea.

The development came after attorneys for Mirkarimi and Lopez lost several bids to exclude a key piece of video evidence. In the video, a tearful Lopez reveals a bruise on her right arm that she claimed resulted from an argument with Mirkarimi on Dec. 31, according to court documents. The video was recorded by Lopez's neighbor, Ivory Madison, on Jan. 1.

Madison reported the incident to police on Jan. 4. Mirkarimi was arrested on Jan. 13, five days after he was sworn in as sheriff.

On Monday, Mirkarimi apologized to Madison, to his other neighbors, the sheriff's department and the people of San Francisco, for the distraction the trial caused.

"I realize what was reported to the police was meant to help my family," Mirkarimi told the court.

Mirkarimi will not be allowed to have contact with his wife until a judge lifts a stay-away order.

"I want to be back with my family, and I want this to end," he told the court.

When the judge asked him if anyone threatened or pressured him to make a plea, Mirkarimi paused for a few moments, before shaking his head and quietly saying "no."

After the court proceedings, Mirkarimi told reporters, "For the last two months this case has cause my family, my department, the sheriff's department and the city great turmoil, pain and disappointment. This plea allows us to move forward."

His attorney, Lidia Stiglich, said she was "very proud" of the sheriff, because he "wants to just step up and move on."

"I think he's made a very difficult and measured decision in trying to do the right thing," Stiglich said.

Under the terms of the plea agreement, the sheriff will be sentenced to three years' probation and will have to serve 100 hours of community service. In addition, he will be required to attend 52 weeks of domestic violence prevention classes and pay a $400 fine. He may also have to take parenting classes, if the probation department deems them necessary.

Mirkarimi will be sentenced next Monday. If he violates the terms of his probation, he can be sentenced to county jail without a trial.