Ullman, a native of New York who has lived in San Francisco for several decades, went on to write two explicitly technology-related books — a memoir and a novel — as well as many essays and nonfiction articles on human-computer interaction.

Compared with her early work, Ullman's much-praised new novel, "By Blood," seems conspicuously, almost defiantly traditional.

A psychological thriller set in gritty 1970s San Francisco, with a classics professor for a protagonist and other characters connected by family and fate to the Holocaust, it dwells within a world where personal computers do not even exist.

Ullman, at her loft in the South of Market neighborhood in San Francisco, where she has lived for 16 years, said the evolution of her work was her way of moving on.

"Some people hit a profession and just keep going deeper into it, making a life and making it more and more stable," she said. "That's not been my experience. I always want to try something new."

New editions of Ullman's two previous books, each with introductions by big names in literature and technology — Mary Gaitskill, a fiction writer, and Jaron Lanier, a Berkeley-based Web prognosticator and the author of "You Are Not a Gadget" — are being rereleased simultaneously with the publication of "By Blood."

%related%

Ullman started programming computers because of an interest in early video photography. She said she had wanted to explore. "Like: This is a cool machine. What can you do with it?" she said. "I was just fascinated by it. I loved when I got something to work."

What's more, she said, "I needed to earn a living." At that time, programming jobs were plentiful even for people like her, who lacked computer science degrees.

Eventually, however, she said she found programming "jittery."

"You're talking to defined interfaces, not making up a whole world," she said. "With code, what it means is what it does. It doesn't express, not really. It's a very bounded conversation. And writing is not bounded. That's what's hard about it."

In recent years she has preferred to strive for fluency with literary language rather than computer code. Even so, the new editions of Ullman's previous books come bearing tech-focused cover designs: a USB cable as fork-tongued serpent, a desktop mouse as hollow-eyed skull.

Ullman's first book, "Close to the Machine: Technophilia and Its Discontents," was originally published in 1997 by City Lights. In his introduction to the new edition, Lanier called it "a remarkable document that is both the best account of the intimate experience of computation by a person and a saved slice of historical memory, of that almost lost moment before everything went digitally nuts."

Gaitskill, in her introduction to Ullman's first novel, "The Bug," which is set in a Silicon Valley start-up in the 1980s, likened it to Nikolai Gogol's short story "The Overcoat," from 1842. Other reviewers have found shades of Mary Shelley and Franz Kafka in Ullman's well-turned prose.

"By Blood" also evokes fervently dreamlike European fiction of earlier eras. After an ambiguous departure from the university, the professor character takes a downtown office to attend to his work, but instead becomes obsessed with listening in on next-door conversation between a therapist and her patient. What follows is a vortex of identity crises, troubled histories, and grappling with, as Ullman writes, "the clammy hand of ancestry."

While the action of Ullman's new book is set pre-Internet, it still resonates deeply with the virtual way we live now. The narrator's account of his eavesdropping — "How odd it was to know such intimate details about a person's life yet have no context in which to place them" — could describe the experience of reading strangers' feeds on Facebook or Twitter.

The appeal of Ullman's work is in that juxtaposition, said Sean McDonald, her editor at Farrar, Straus & Giroux in New York. "She combines, in unexpected ways, a distinct sense of immediacy and cultural currency — of nowness — with old-fashioned, Old World atmosphere and storytelling," he said.

Oscar Villalon, managing editor of the local literary journal Zyzzyva, a sponsor of a reading by Ullman and Lanier at Dalloway's Bookstore in Berkeley later this month, echoed that thought. "I still recall her fine piece on Linux versus Windows," he said. "In theory, you might not have cared a bit about that sort of thing, but her writing brings out concerns about values, making you see implications you would have otherwise been ignorant of." (The Bay Citizen is also a sponsor of the reading.)

For Ullman, understanding the power of technology does not negate the value of narrative. "I think storytelling in general is how we really deeply know things," she said. "It's ancient."

This article also appears in the Bay Area edition of The New York Times.