Images from the video show a tearful Eliana Lopez revealing a bruise on her right arm. According to court documents, Lopez said the bruise was the result of an argument she had with Mirkarimi on Dec. 31. Lopez's neighbor, Ivory Madison, recorded the video on Jan. 1, during a conversation with Lopez about the alleged incident.

After the trial judge, Garrett Wong, ruled last week that the video was admissable as evidence, Lopez's attorneys filed an appeal, claiming Lopez believed that Madison was an attorney, and that their conversation, including the video, was protected by attorney-client privilege.

In their ruling, the appellate division judges did not explain why they denied Lopez's appeal.

"We are pleased with the court's ruling and look forward to moving ahead with the trial," said Stephanie Ong Stillman, a spokeswoman for the District Attorney's Office.

Lopez's attorney, Paula Canny, appealed the ruling today to the state Court of Appeal, according to San Francisco Superior Court spokeswoman Ann Donlan. Canny could not be reached for comment Friday evening.

Mirkarimi's attorney, Lidia Stiglich, has filed two separate motions regarding the video, arguing it should not be admissible because if Lopez does not testify in the trial, there is no way for Stiglich to cross-examine her about the statements she made on the video.

"I don't think any of us should agree that we should be tried by video," Stiglich said. "You can't cross-examine a video."

Mirkarimi has pleaded not guilty to three misdemeanor charges: domestic battery, child endangerment and dissuading a witness. If convicted, the sheriff could spend a year in prison and three years on probation.

Lopez has refused to cooperate with the investigation, which began on Jan. 4, when Madison contacted police.

Stiglich filed another motion Thursday in an effort to block testimony by Mirkarimi's ex-girlfriend, Christina Flores, who claimed he verbally and physically abused her during their relationship four years ago.

Flores, an aspiring television personality, testified last Friday and Monday in an evidentiary hearing to determine whether she would be allowed to appear as a witness for the prosecution. Wong ruled that Flores could testify during the trial, because her statements could help establish a pattern of behavior by the sheriff.

%related%

Flores said she filed a police report in January after reading a newspaper account of the charges against Mirkarimi. Flores testified that she and Mirkarimi were involved in an on-again-off-again relationship that lasted from June 2007 until December 2008.

During one argument, Flores told the judge, Mirkarimi yelled in her face and grabbed her arm, leaving a bruise. Flores' account of the incident is strikingly similar to what prosecutors allege happened between Mirkarimi and Lopez on Dec. 31.

Stiglich argued in her motion Thursday that Flores' statements are "flawed" and impossible to corroborate. She also suggested that Flores was only motivated to testify by a personal vendetta against the sheriff, because he refused to commit to their relationship.

The motion contains lines from what Stiglich called a "lengthy hate poem" that Flores emailed to Mirkarimi on Jan. 2, 2009, shortly after their relationship ended, in which she appears to threaten to damage Mirkarimi's career:

So as 2009 rolls in and you roll outI remember what my life is all aboutSurrounded by so many of my friendsI am rich and happy with how my story endsExcept one thing. I have never had the distinct displeasureOf meeting such an idiot of such great measureThat freely let me know of thingsThat could unwind plans of what his political future bringsYes, I do know those, some of whom you hate.Who could have a say in your fate.And long friendships with some that you despise.That after the fact have opened my eyesWhat to do with the ball in my court...Let us see what happens.

Stiglich also cited inconsistencies in Flores' statements to police. According to Stiglich, Flores said in one interview that Mirkarimi grabbed her by both arms. In another, she said he grabbed only one arm.

Stiglich described Flores an "eager participant in the media frenzy" surrounding the case. After reading about the case from her home in Southern California, Flores testified that she called a Bay Area television station and asked to speak with a reporter.

Stiglich has also filed a motion to move the trial to a different county, arguing that the extensive media coverage of the case has prevented Mirkarimi's ability to get a fair trial.

Wong has not yet ruled on those motions, but on Friday afternoon, he ruled that Nancy Lemon, a lecturer at Berkeley Law, could testify as an expert witness during the trial. Lemon has has helped write state laws on domestic violence and has written a legal textbook on the subject. Prosecutors want to use her testimony to show that Lopez's behavior after the alleged incident is consistent with "intimate partner battery" and its effects on victims.

In court Friday, Lemon testified that it was very common for victims of domestic violence to minimize or recant allegations, and that victims of abusers with prominent positions in society are even less likely to come forward. Speaking in general, rather than about the Mirkarimi case in particular, she said it was common for victims to avoid telling the police.

"In my experience, victims of abuse are more likely to tell someone who is close to them, whether that is a family member or neighbor or friend, than to tell someone in authority," Lemon said.

Jury selection will continue Monday morning, when 144 prospective jurors will be questioned by prosecutors and defense attorneys.

Ryan Jacobs contributed reporting.