When Michelle Long saw workers throwing out documents at her San Francisco church, Bethel African Methodist Episcopal, at a conference 12 years ago, she decided something had to be done — so she became the church archivist.

"You can't throw those out!" Long remembered exclaiming.

These days, plastic tubs, big and small, filled with old records and photographs are spread throughout Long's house. They are a testament to the herculean task she has undertaken: cataloguing Bethel AME's 160-year history, which the congregation is celebrating this week.

Bethel AME is one of five San Francisco black organizations founded before the Civil War — three churches (Third Baptist Church, First AME Zion Church and Bethel) and two fraternal orders (Hannibal Lodge No. 1 and Victoria Lodge No. 3) date to 1852.

"We're just beginning to understand their historic importance," said John William Templeton, a local historian, entrepreneur and author of "Come to the Water: Sharing the Rich Black Experience in San Francisco."

In his research for the book, Templeton concluded that unlike in much of the country at that time, San Francisco's black community was "on a relatively equal level with white abolitionists."

Philip Montesano, a history professor at City College of San Francisco, painted a less rosy picture. Although California did not permit slavery, he said, the state's charter was by no means progressive toward black people as it denied them the right to public education, to testify in court, to homestead public lands and to vote.

Nevertheless, San Francisco's black community at the time — just 464 people in 1852, growing to 1,176 by 1860, about 30 percent of the entire state's black population — was very politically active, according to Montesano.

The three San Francisco churches, along with others across the state, held conventions through 1865 to change California's racist laws. The laws did eventually come off the books; the education statute was repealed, for instance, by 1880.

%related%

"The big things in terms of the San Francisco area were the churches, the conventions and the newspapers," Montesano said. "The lodges were more like gathering places."

More recently, though, huge demographic shifts in the city have led the Rev. J. Edgar Boyd, head of Bethel AME, to wonder about the next 160 years of his church. According to the 2010 census, the black population has shrunk to 49,000 — down by about half from its peak of 96,000 in 1970.

"The gentrification that has taken place here is without parallel," said  Boyd. "It's affected us like every other African-American church in town. There's a downward trend in attendance."

History remains a source of hope to members of Bethel. Long, who works on a volunteer basis, called it her "birth church."

On Sunday, there were festivities to celebrate its past.

"We have a presentation that talks about the challenge and excitement about the dream created when the church was first organized," Boyd said. "And we challenge the congregation to keep that dream alive."

A version of this article also appears in the Bay Area edition of The New York Times.