Ed Lee stood in front the tall doors of Room 200, the mayor's office, which he has temporarily occupied since January. He spoke briefly to reporters in his avuncular way, joking about eating too many pork buns, before discussing his historic win.

"I'm confident that we can use the word victory right now, which obviously sounds very good for the first elected Asian mayor of the city," Lee said. "I want to thank the people of San Francisco," he said, his voice breaking with emotion.

According to preliminary results released Wednesday, Lee won in the 11th round of the ranked-choice voting tabulation, with 61 percent of the remaining ballots. Supervisor John Avalos came in second with 38.8 percent.

Avalos, who surged late in the race and emerged from a crowded field as a foil to Lee, was thrilled with the results. "We are incredibly proud to have run a clean, issue-based campaign, with 99 percent of the work done by volunteers," he said. "We defied expectations."

He was not ready to concede. "There are still some votes to be counted," said his campaign spokeswoman, Erica Fox. "He's going to wait until all of the votes are counted."

There are still about 32,500 ballots to count, including 25,000 vote-by-mail ballots and 7,500 provisional ballots, according to John Arntz, the director of elections. Lee has a 25,000-vote lead on Avalos.

%related%

Lee had never run for election before this year and had vowed not to enter the race after the Board of Supervisors appointed him interim mayor in January. But he reversed himself after former Mayor Willie Brown and Rose Pak, the powerful Chinatown political consultant, helped lead a campaign to convince Lee to enter the race.

Lee officially declared his candidacy three months ago and instantly became the leading candidate. His campaign did not appear to stumble even after allegations of voter fraud by workers for an independent political group backing his candidacy surfaced in the final weeks of the race.

The interim mayor had all but declared victory at two parties in his honor Tuesday night. On Wednesday, Lee said that one of his biggest supporters was especially thrilled. "My good friend, Willie Brown, is jumping up and down, I'm sure," Lee said.

Though Avalos emerged as a rival to Lee, he lacked the broad base of support needed to pose a serious challenge to the interim mayor's candidacy. However, standing with the Occupy movement and not shying away from his progressive roots, Avalos distinguished himself as the clear alternative to Lee as Election Day neared.

"In a muddied field of candidates, and with Ed lee as the popular incumbent, Avalos was the one who ended up differentiating himself," said Corey Cook, a political science professor at the University of San Francisco.

"To me, Avalos is one of the big winners in this," Cook said. "His status among the progressives is really solidified now."

With the help of public financing, Avalos still had less than half the money of Lee's campaign, as of the most recent filing deadline. And that doesn't include the deep-pocketed independent political groups that spent heavily for the interim mayor. Cook said Avalos didn't gain any ground on Lee in the last month, but he did take votes from other candidates with his energetic grass-roots campaign that included a low-rider rally in the Mission District.

Without ranked-choice voting, Avalos may have had a better shot at taking on Lee, Cook said.

"Progressives are looking at what might have been if there had been a December election," said Cook. "A lot of progressives are saying, 'If we only had another month.'"

The rest of the candidates, it turned out, were too similar to Lee to emerge as real challengers. Even Dennis Herrera — the city attorney who sought to distinguish himself from Lee by opposing the $1.6 billion Central Subway project — did not end up differentiating himself in the minds of the voters. When Herrera was eliminated in the ranked-choice tally, Avalos received 6,683 votes and Lee received 4,705.

The results were unlike Jean Quan's come-from-behind victory in Oakland last year, when few voters selected front runner Don Perata as their second or third choice. Lee was a popular first, second and third choice, even on the ballots of people who voted for Herrera, who often disagreed with Lee on key issues.

Cook said that both Herrera and David Chiu, the Board of Supervisors president, would have been serious contenders if Lee had kept his promise to stay out of the mayor's race.

"Both of them built pretty wide moderate-left coalitions, so without Lee in the race it probably comes down to Chiu or Herrera," he said.

The results also showed that George Gascón, who had never prosecuted a case before this year, won the district attorney's race in the third round of Wednesday's tabulation. Gascon won with 63.6 percent of the remaining ballots; David Onek came in second with 36.4 percent of the remaining ballots.

In the sheriff's race, Supervisor Ross Mirkarimi was leading in the third round, with 52.8 percent. Paul Miyamoto, a sheriff's captain, was in second with 47.2 percent. Mirkarimi said would wait for all the votes to be counted before declaring victory.

"I'm honored and humbled by the progress we've achieved so far in this campaign," said Mirkarimi. "But I want to wait till all the votes are in."

Although the race remains "tight," according to Corey Cook, Mirkarimi "is in a very good position" to win.

Arntz said voter turnout was at 34 percent and could reach 40 percent, well below the average of 50 percent for the city's mayoral elections.

"I was startled, to be honest, when I saw the numbers," Arntz said. "It seemed like there was a lot of interest — at least in the media."

Cook attributed the voter apathy to the wide field of largely indistinguishable mayoral candidates.

"Voters were probably saying to themselves, 'Am I going to take the time to figure out who to vote for when Ed Lee's going win anyway?'" said Cook. "It never really took on the energy of previous elections."